<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!--
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Siouan Sociology by James Owen Dorsey


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Siouan Sociology

Author: James Owen Dorsey

Release Date: October 10, 2006 [Ebook #19518]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8
-->

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Siouan Sociology</title>
      <title type="sub">A Posthumous Paper - Fifteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology to the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, 1893-1894, Government Printing Office, Washington, 1897, pages 205-244</title>
      <author>James Owen Dorsey</author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date value="2006-10-10">October 10, 2006</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">19518</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
    <classDecl>
      <taxonomy id="lc">
        <bibl>
          <title>Library of Congress Classification</title>
        </bibl>
      </taxonomy>
    </classDecl>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
    </langUsage>
    <textClass>
    </textClass>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2006-10-10">October 10, 2006</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>PM for Bureau of American Ethnology,<lb /></name>
        <name>Joshua Hutchinson and<lb /></name>
        <name>The Online Distributed Proofreading Team<lb /></name>
        <name>(This file was produced from images generously made available by the Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF/Gallica) at http://gallica.bnf.fr)</name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Posted to Project Gutenberg</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    figure           { text-align: center; page-float: 'htbp' }
    .floatleft       { float: left;  margin-right: 2em }
    .floatright      { float: right; margin-left:  2em }
    .w90             { }
    .w50             { }
    .w20             { }
    .w05             { }
    @media pdf {
      .w90             { width: 90% }
      .w50             { width: 50% }
      .w20             { width: 20% }
      .w05             { width: 5% }
    }
  </pgStyleSheet>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>

    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: right">
      <divGen type="titlepage" />
    </div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="207" /><anchor id="Pg207" />

<p>In 1871, at the age of 23, James Owen Dorsey, previously a student
of divinity with a predilection for science, was ordained a deacon of
the Protestant Episcopal church by the bishop of Virginia; and in May
of that year he was sent to Dakota Territory as a missionary among
the Ponka Indians. Characterized by an amiability that quickly won
the confidence of the Indians, possessed of unbounded enthusiasm,
and gifted with remarkable aptitude in discriminating and imitating
vocal sounds, he at once took up the study of the native language,
and, during the ensuing two years, familiarized himself with the
Ponka and cognate dialects; at the same time he obtained a rich
fund of information concerning the arts, institutions, traditions, and
beliefs of the Indians with whom he was brought into daily contact.
In August, 1873, his field work was interrupted by illness, and he
returned to his home in Maryland and assumed parish work, meantime
continuing his linguistic studies. In July, 1878, he was induced by
Major Powell to resume field researches among the aborigines, and
repaired to the Omaha reservation, in Nebraska, under the auspices of
the Smithsonian Institution, where he greatly increased his stock of
linguistic and other material. When the Bureau of Ethnology was
instituted in 1879, his services were at once enlisted, and the remainder
of his life was devoted to the collection and publication of ethnologic
material, chiefly linguistic. Although most of his energies were devoted
to the Siouan stock, he studied also the Athapascan, Kusan, Takilman,
and Yakonan stocks; and while his researches were primarily linguistic,
his collections relating to other subjects, especially institutions and
beliefs, were remarkably rich. His publications were many, yet the
greater part of the material amassed during his years of labor remains
for elaboration by others. The memoir on "Siouan Sociology," which
was substantially ready for the press, is the only one of his many manuscripts
left in condition for publication. He died in Washington,
February 4, 1895, of typhoid fever, at the early age of 47.</p>

<p rend="text-align: right">WJM.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="208" /><anchor id="Pg208" />
<head>ALPHABET</head>

<p>a, as in <hi rend="font-style: italic">father</hi>.</p>

<p>'a, an initially exploded a.</p>

<p>ă, as in <hi rend="font-style: italic">what</hi>, or as <hi rend="font-style: italic">o</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">not</hi>.</p>

<p>'ă, an initially exploded ă.</p>

<p>ä, as in <hi rend="font-style: italic">hat</hi>.</p>

<p>c, as <hi rend="font-style: italic">sh</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">she</hi>. See ṡ.</p>

<p>ɔ, a medial <hi rend="font-style: italic">sh</hi>, a sonant-surd</p>

<p>ć (Dakota letter), as <hi rend="font-style: italic">ch</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">church</hi>.</p>

<p>ç, as <hi rend="font-style: italic">th</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">thin</hi>.</p>

<p>ɔ́, a medial ç, sonant-surd.</p>

<p>¢, as <hi rend="font-style: italic">th</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">the</hi>.</p>

<p>e, as in <hi rend="font-style: italic">they</hi>.</p>

<p>'e, an initially exploded e.</p>

<p>ĕ, as in <hi rend="font-style: italic">get</hi>.</p>

<p>'ĕ, an initially exploded ĕ.</p>

<p>g, as in <hi rend="font-style: italic">go</hi>.</p>

<p>ġ (in Dakota), <hi rend="font-style: italic">gh</hi>. See x.</p>

<p>ɥ (in Osage), an h after a pure or nasalized
  vowel, expelled through the mouth
  with the lips wide apart.</p>

<p>ḣ (in Dakota), <hi rend="font-style: italic">kh</hi>, etc. See q.</p>

<p>i, as in <hi rend="font-style: italic">machine</hi>.</p>

<p>'i, an initially exploded i.</p>

<p>ĭ, as in <hi rend="font-style: italic">pin</hi>.</p>

<p>j, as <hi rend="font-style: italic">z</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">azure</hi>, or as <hi rend="font-style: italic">j</hi> in the French
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">Jacques</hi>.</p>

<p>ʞ, a medial k, a sonant-surd,</p>

<p>k', an exploded k. See next letter.</p>

<p>ḳ (in Dakota), an exploded k.</p>

<p>ɯ (in Kansa), a medial m, a sound between m and b.</p>

<p>ɳ (in Dakota), after a vowel has the sound
  of <hi rend="font-style: italic">n</hi> in the French <hi rend="font-style: italic">bon</hi>. See [<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>].</p>

<p>ñ, as <hi rend="font-style: italic">ng</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">sing</hi>.</p>

<p>hn, its initial sound is expelled from the
  nostrils and is scarcely heard.</p>

<p>o, as in <hi rend="font-style: italic">no</hi>.</p>

<p>'o, an initially exploded o.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>, a medial b or p, a sonant-surd.</p>

<p>p', an exploded p.</p>

<p>q, as German <hi rend="font-style: italic">ch</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">ach</hi>. See ḣ.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-weight: bold">s</hi>, a medial z or s, a sonant-surd.</p>

<p>ṡ (in Dakota), as <hi rend="font-style: italic">sh</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">she</hi>. See c.</p>

<p>ʇ, a medial d or t, a sonant-surd.</p>

<p>t', an exploded t.</p>

<p>u, as <hi rend="font-style: italic">oo</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">tool</hi>.</p>

<p>'u, an initially exploded u.</p>

<p>ŭ, as <hi rend="font-style: italic">oo</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">foot</hi>.</p>

<p>u̱, a sound between o and u.</p>

<p>ü, as in German <hi rend="font-style: italic">kühl</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">süss</hi>.</p>

<p>x, <hi rend="font-style: italic">gh</hi>, or nearly the Arabic <hi rend="font-style: italic">ghain</hi>. See ġ.</p>

<p>ź (in Dakota), as <hi rend="font-style: italic">z</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">azure</hi>. See j.</p>

<p>dj, as <hi rend="font-style: italic">j</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">judge</hi>.</p>

<p>tc, as <hi rend="font-style: italic">ch</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">church</hi>. See ć.</p>

<p>tc', an exploded tc.</p>

<p>ʇɔ, a medial tc, a sonant-surd.</p>

<p>ts', an exploded ts.</p>

<p>ʇs, a medial ts, a sonant-surd.</p>

<p>ai, as in <hi rend="font-style: italic">aisle</hi>.</p>

<p>au, as <hi rend="font-style: italic">ow</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">how</hi>.</p>

<p>yu, as <hi rend="font-style: italic">u</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">tune</hi>, or <hi rend="font-style: italic">ew</hi> in <hi rend="font-style: italic">few</hi>.</p>

<p>The following have the ordinary English sounds: b, d, h, k, l, m, n,
p, r, s, t, w, y, and z. A superior n (<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>) after a vowel (compare the Dakota
ɳ) has the sound of the French n in <hi rend="font-style: italic">bon</hi>, <hi rend="font-style: italic">vin</hi>, etc. A plus sign (+)
after any letter prolongs it.</p>

<p>The vowels 'a, 'e, 'i, 'o, 'u, and their modifications are styled initially
exploded vowels for want of a better appellation, there being in each
case an initial explosion. These vowels are approximately or partially
pectoral sounds found in the Siouan languages and also in some of the
languages of western Oregon and in the language of the Hawaiian
islands.</p>
</div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: right">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: right">
      <head>Illustrations</head>
      <divGen type="fig" />
    </div>
</front>

<body>
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pb n="213" /><anchor id="Pg213" />

<head>SIOUAN SOCIOLOGY</head>

<p>BY JAMES OWEN DORSEY</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>GENERAL FEATURES OF ORGANIZATION</head>

<p>In the study of the organization of societies, units of different orders
are discovered. Among the tribes of the Siouan family the primary
unit is the clan or gens, which is composed of a number of consanguinei,
claiming descent from a common ancestor and having common
taboos; the term clan implying descent in the female line, while gens
implies descent in the male line. Among the Dakota, as among the
¢egiha and other groups, the man is the head of the family.</p>

<p>Several of the Siouan tribes are divided into two, and one (the
Osage) is divided into three subtribes. Other tribes are composed of
phratries, and each subtribe or phratry comprises a number of gentes.
In some tribes each gens is made up of subgentes, and these in turn
of a lower order of groups, which are provisionally termed sections for
want of a better designation. The existence of these minor groups
among the Omaha has been disputed by some, though other members
of the tribe claim that they are real units of the lowest order. Among
the Teton many groups which were originally sections have become
gentes, for the marriage laws do not affect the original phratries,
gentes, and subgentes.</p>

<p>The state, as existing among the Siouan tribes, may be termed a
kinship state, in that the governmental functions are performed by
men whose offices are determined by kinship, and in that the rules
relating to kinship and reproduction constitute the main body of the
recognized law. By this law marriage and the mutual rights and
duties of the several members of each body of kindred are regulated.
Individuals are held responsible, chiefly to their kindred; and certain
groups of kindred are in some cases held responsible to other groups
of kindred. When other conduct, such as the distribution of game
taken in the forest or fish from the waters, is regulated, the rules or
laws pertaining thereto involve, to a certain extent, the considerations
of kinship.</p>

<pb n="214" /><anchor id="Pg214" />

<p>The legislative, executive, and judicative functions have not been
differentiated in Indian society as found among the Siouan groups.
Two tendencies or processes of opposite character have been observed
among the tribes, viz, consolidation and segregation. The effects of
consolidation are conspicuous among the Omaha, Kansa, Osage, and
Oto, while segregation has affected the social organization among the
Kansa, Ponka, and Teton. There have been instances of emigration
from one tribe to another of the same linguistic family; and among the
Dakota new gentes have been formed by the adoption into the tribe of
foreigners, i.e., those of a different stock.</p>

<p>Two classes of organization are found in the constitution of the
state, viz, (1) major organizations, which relate directly to government,
and (2) minor organizations, which relate only indirectly to government.
The former embraces the state functionaries, the latter comprises
corporations.</p>

<p>Although the state functionaries are not clearly differentiated, three
classes of such men have been recognized: chiefs, policemen or soldiers,
and young men or "the common people." The chiefs are the
civil and religious leaders of the masses; the policemen are the servants
of the chiefs; the young men are such as have not distinguished
themselves in war or in any other way. These last have no voice in
the assembly, which is composed of the chiefs alone. Among the
Omaha there is no military class, yet there is a war element which is
regulated by the Elk gens. The ¢ixida gens and part of the Nika<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>aɔna
gens of the Ponka tribe are considered to be the warriors of the
tribe, though members of other gentes have participated in war. In
the Kansa tribe two gentes, the Large Hañga and the Small Hañga,
form the phratry connected with war, though warriors did not necessarily
belong to those gentes alone. In the Osage camping circle all
the gentes on the right side are war gentes, but the first and second,
reckoning from the van, are the soldiers or policemen; while all the
gentes camping on the left are associated with peace, though their first
and second gentes, reckoning from the van, are policemen or soldiers.
Among the Omaha both officers and warriors must be taken from the
class of "young men," as the chiefs are afraid to act as leaders in war;
and among both the Omaha and the Ponka the chiefs, being the civil
and religious leaders of the people, can not serve as captains, or even
as members, of an ordinary war party, though they may fight when
the whole tribe engages in war. Among the Dakota, however, chiefs
have led in time of war.</p>

<p>Corporations among the Siouan tribes are minor organizations, indirectly
related to the government, though they do not constitute a part
of it. The Omaha, for instance, and perhaps other tribes of the family,
are organized into certain societies for religious, industrial, and other
ends. There are two kinds of societies, the brotherhoods and the
feasting organizations. The former are the dancing societies, to some
of which the physicians belong.</p>

<pb n="215" /><anchor id="Pg215" />

<p>Social classes are undifferentiated. Any man can win a name and
rank in the section, gens, phratry, tribe, or nation by bravery in war or
by generosity in the bestowal of presents and the frequent giving of
feasts. While there are no slaves among the Siouan tribes, there are
several kinds of servants in civil, military, and religious affairs.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE DAKOTA TRIBES</head>

<p></p>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>DESIGNATION AND MODE OF CAMPING</head>

<p>The Dakota call themselves Otceti cakowi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Oćeti śakowiɳ<note place="foot"><p>Wherever in this paper there is a double notation of a Dakota name the former is expressed in the
alphabet of the Bureau of Ethnology and the latter in that of Dr S.R. Riggs, author of the memoirs
in Contributions to North American Ethnology, vols. VII and IX.</p></note>), The
Seven Fireplaces or Council-fires. This designation refers to their
original gentes, the Mdewaka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>to<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Mdewakaɳ-toɳwaɳ), Waqpekute
(Waḣpe-kute), Waqpe-to<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Waḣpetoɳwaɳ), Sisito<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Sisitoɳwaɳ),
Ihañk-to<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Ihaɳktoɳwaɳ), Ihañk-to<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>na (Ihaɳktoɳwaɳna),
and Tito<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Titoɳwaɳ). They camped in two sets of concentric circles,
one of four circles, consisting probably of the Mdewaka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>to<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>,
Waqpe-kute, Waqpe-to<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> and Sisito<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>; and the other of three circles,
including the Ihañkto<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Ihañkto<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>na, and Tito<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, as shown
by the dialectal resemblances and variations as well as by the relative
positions of their former habitats.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" level1="THE MDEWAKANTONWAN" />
<head>THE MDEWAKA<hi rend="vertical-align: super">N</hi>TO<hi rend="vertical-align: super">N</hi>WA<hi rend="vertical-align: super">N</hi></head>

<p>The Mdewaka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>to<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> were so called from their former habitat, Mdewaka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>,
or Mysterious lake, commonly called Spirit lake, one of the
Mille Lacs in Minnesota. The whole name means Mysterious Lake
village, and the term was used by De l'Isle as early as 1703. The
Mdewaka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>to<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> were the original Santee, but the white people, following
the usage of the Ihañkto<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Ihañkto<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>na, and Tito<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>,
now extend that name to the Waqpekute, Waqpeto<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, and Sisito<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>.
The gentes of the Mdewaka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>to<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> are as follows:<note place="foot"><p>S.R. Riggs, in Smithsonian Contributions to Knowledge, vol. IV, p. xvi, 1852, and in Contributions
to North American Ethnology, vol. IX.</p></note></p>

<p>1. Kiyuksa, Breakers (of the law or custom); so called because members
of this gens disregarded the marriage law by taking wives within
the gens.</p>

<p>2. Qe-mini-tca<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Ḣe-mini-ćaɳ) or Qemnitca (Ḣemnića), literally,
"Mountain-water-wood;" so called from a hill covered with timber that
appears to rise out of the water. This was the gens of Red Wing,
whose village was a short distance from Lake Pepin, Minnesota.</p>

<p>3. Kap'oja (Kap̣oźa), Not encumbered-with-much-baggage; "Light
Infantry." "Kaposia, or Little Crow's village," in Minnesota, in 1852.</p>

<p>4. Maxa-yute-cni (Maġa-yute-'sni), Eats-no-geese.</p>

<p>5. Qeyata-oto<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>we (Ḣeyata-otoɳwe), of-its-chief-Hake-wacte (Hake
waṡte); Qeyata-to<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Ḣeyata-toɳwaɳ) of Reverend A.L. Riggs, Village-back-from-the-river.</p>

<pb n="216" /><anchor id="Pg216" />

<p>6. Oyate-citca (Oyate ṡića), Bad nation.</p>

<p>7. Ti<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ta-oto<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>we (Tiɳta-otorɳwe), of Hake-wacte, or Ti<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ta to<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Tiɳtatoɳwaɳ)
of A.L. Riggs, Village on-the-prairie (tiɳta).</p>

<p>These seven gentes still exist, or did exist as late as 1880.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE WAQPE-KUTE</head>

<p>The name waqpe-kute is derived from waqpe (waḣpe), leaf, and kute,
to shoot at, and signifies Shooters-among-the-leaves, i.e., among the
deciduous trees, as distinguished from Wazi-kute, Shooters-at-or-among-the-pines.
The gentes exist, but their names have not been recorded.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" level1="THE WAQPE-TONWAN OR WAHPETON" />
<head>THE WAQPE-TO<hi rend="vertical-align: super">N</hi>WA<hi rend="vertical-align: super">N</hi> OR WAHPETON</head>

<p>The name of this people signifies Yillage-among-the-leaves (of deciduous
trees), the gens being known to the whites as Leaf Village or
Wahpeton. The gentes of this people, as given in 1884 by Reverend
Edward Ashley, are the following:</p>

<figure url="images/image01.png" rend="floatleft; w50">
<index index="fig" />
<head>FIG. 30.—Sisseton and Wahpeton camping circle.</head>
<figDesc>Illustration: FIG. 30.—Sisseton and Wahpeton camping circle.</figDesc></figure>

<p>13. I<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ya<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-tceyaka-ato<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Iɳyaɳ-ćeyaka-atoɳwaɳ),
Village-at-the-dam-or-rapids.</p>

<p>14. Takapsin-to<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>na (Takapsin-toɳwaɳna),
Village-at-the-shinny-ground.</p>

<p>15. Wiyaka-otina, Dwellers-on-the-sand
(wiyaka).</p>

<p>16. Oteqi-ato<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Oteḣi-atoɳwaɳ),Village-in-the-thicket
(oteḣi).</p>

<p>17. Wita-otina, Dwellers-on-the-island
(wita).</p>

<p>18. Wakpa-ato<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Wakpa-atoɳwaɳ),
Village-on-the-river.</p>

<p>19. Tca<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-kaxa-otina (Ćan-kaġa-otina), Dwellers-in-log (-huts?).</p>

<p>The numbers prefixed to the names of these gentes denote their
respective places in the camping circle of the Sisseton and Wahpeton,
as shown in figure 30.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" level1="THE SISITONWAN OR SISSETON" />
<head>THE SISITO<hi rend="vertical-align: super">N</hi>WA<hi rend="vertical-align: super">N</hi> OR SISSETON</head>

<p>It is evident that the Sisseton were formerly in seven divisions, the
Wita-waziyata-otina and the Ohdihe being counted as one; the Basdetce-cni
and Itokaq-tina as another; the Kaqmi-ato<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Maniti, and
Keze as a third, and the Tizapta<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> and Okopeya as a fifth. When only
a part of the tribe journeyed together, the people camped in the following
manner: The Amdo-wapuskiyapi pitched their tents between the
west and north, the Wita-waziyata-otina between the north and east,
the Itokaq-tina between the east and south, and the Kap'oja between
the south and west. The following are the Sisseton gentes (figure 31):</p>

<p>1. Wita-waziyata-otina, Village-at-the-north-island.</p>

<pb n="217" /><anchor id="Pg217" />

<p>2. Ohdihe (from ohdiha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, to fall into an object endwise). This gens
is an offshoot of the Wita-waziyata-otina.</p>

<p>3. Basdetce-cni (Basdeće-ṡni), Do-not-split (the body of a buffalo)-with-a-knife
(but cut it up as they please).</p>

<p>4. Itokaq-tina (Itokali-tina), Dwellers-at-the-south (itokaġa). These
are an offshoot of the Basdetce-cni.</p>

<p>5. Kaqmi-ato<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Kalimi-atoɳwaɳ), Village-at-the-bend (kalimin).</p>

<p>6. Mani-ti, Those-who-camp (ti)-away-from-the-village. An offshoot
of the Kaqmi-ato<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>.</p>

<p>7. Keze, Barbed-like-a-fishhook. An offshoot of the Kaqmi-ato<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>.</p>

<p>8. Tca<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-kute (Ćaɳ kute), Shoot-in-the-woods (among the deciduous
trees); a name of derision. These people, according to Ashley, resemble
the Keze, whom he styles a "cross clan."</p>

<p>9. Ti-zapta<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Ti-zaptaɳ), Five-lodges.</p>

<p>10. Okopeya, In-danger. An offshoot of the Ti-zapta<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>.</p>

<p>11. Kap'oja (Kapoźa), Those-who-travel-with-light-burdens. (See
number 3 of the Mdewaka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>to<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>.)</p>

<p>12. Amdo-wapuskiyapi, Those-who-lay-meat-on-their-shoulders
(amdo)-to-dry-it
(wapuskiya)-during-the-hunt.</p>

<figure url="images/image02.png" rend="floatleft; w50">
<index index="fig" />
<head>FIG. 31.—Sisseton camping circle.</head>
<figDesc>Illustration: FIG. 31.—Sisseton camping circle.</figDesc></figure>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" level1="THE IHANKTONWAN OR YANKTON" />
<head>THE IHAÑKTO<hi rend="vertical-align: super">N</hi>WA<hi rend="vertical-align: super">N</hi> OR YANKTON</head>

<p>The Yankton and Yanktonai speak the
Yankton dialect, which has many words
in common with the Teton.</p>

<p>In 1878 Walking Elk wrote the names
of the Yankton gentes in the following
order: 1, Tca<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-kute (Ćaɳ kute), Shoot-in-the-woods;
2, Tcaxu (Ćaġu), Lights or
lungs; 3, Wakmuha-oi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Wakmuha oiɳ),Pumpkin-rind-earring; 4, Ihaisdaye,
Mouth-greasers; 5, Watceu<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>pa (Waćeuɳpa), Roasters; 6, Ikmu<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>
(Ikmuɳ), An animal of the cat kind (lynx, panther, or wildcat); 7,
Oyate-citca (Oyate-ṡiċa), Bad-nation; 8, Wacitcu<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-tci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>tca (Waṡićaɳ-ćiɳċa)
(a modern addition), Sons-of-white-men, the "Half-blood band."
But in 1891 Reverend Joseph W. Cook, who has been missionary to
the Yankton since 1870, obtained from several men the following order
of gentes (ignoring the half-bloods): On the right side of the circle
were, 1, Iha isdaye; 2, Wakmuha-oi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>; 3, Ikmu<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>. On the left side of
the circle were, 4, Watceu<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>pa; 5, Tca<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-kute; 6, Oyate-citca; and, 7,
Tcaxu.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" level1="THE IHANKTONWANNA OR YANKTONAI"  />
<head>THE IHAÑKTO<hi rend="vertical-align: super">N</hi>WA<hi rend="vertical-align: super">N</hi>NA OR YANKTONAI</head>

<p>The Yanktonai are divided into the Upper and Lower Yanktonai,
the latter being known as the Huñkpatina, Those-camping-at-one-end
(or "horn")-of-the-tribal-circle.</p>

<pb n="218" /><anchor id="Pg218" />

<p>The Upper Yanktonai geutes are as follows: 1, Tca<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-ona (Ćaɳ ona),
Shoot-at-trees, or Wazi-kute, Shooters-among-the-pines; from these the
Ho-he or Asiniboin have sprung. 2, Takini, Improved-in-condition
(as a lean animal or a poor man). 3, Cikcitcena (Ṡikṡićena), Bad-ones-of-different-sorts.
4, Bakiho<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Bakihoɳ), Gash-themselves-with-knives.
5, Kiyuksa, Breakers (of the law or custom); see Mdewaka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>to<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>
gens number 1. 6, Pa-baksa, Cut-heads; some of these are on Devils
Lake reservation, North Dakota. 7, Name forgotten.</p>

<p>The following are the gentes of the Lower Yanktonai, or Huñkpatina:
1, Pute-temini, Sweat-lips; the gens of Maxa-bomdu or Drifting Goose.
2, Gŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-iktceka (Ṡuɳ ikćeka), Common dogs. 3, Taquha-yuta (Taḣuha-yuta),
Eat-the-scrapings-of-hides. 4, Sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-ona (Saɳ-ona), Shot-at-some-white-object;
this name originated from killing an albino buffalo; a
Huñkpapa chief said that refugees or strangers from another tribe
were so called. 5, Iha-ca (Iha-ṡa), Red-lips. 6, Ite-xu (Ite-ġu), Burned-face.
7, Pte-yute-cni (Pte-yute-ṡni), Eat-no-buffalo-cows.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" level1="THE TITONWAN OR TETON" />
<head>THE TITO<hi rend="vertical-align: super">N</hi>WA<hi rend="vertical-align: super">N</hi> OR TETON</head>

<p></p>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>TRIBAL DIVISIONS</head>

<p>The Teton are divided into seven tribes, which were formerly gentes.
These are the Sitca<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>xu (Sićanġu), Itaziptco (Itazipćo), Siha-sapa, Minikooju
(Minikooźu), Oohe-no<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>pa (Oohe-noɳpa), Oglala, and Huñkpapa.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" level1="THE SITCANXU" />
<head>THE SITCA<hi rend="vertical-align: super">N</hi>XU</head>

<p>The Sitca<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>xu, Bois Brulés or Burned Thighs, are divided locally into
(1) Qeyata-witcaca (Ḣeyata wićaṡa), People-away-from-the-river, the
Highland or Upper Brulé, and (2) the Kud (Kuta or Ku<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ta)-witcaca,
the Lowland or Lower Brulé. The Sitca<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>xu are divided socially into
gentes, of which the number has increased in recent years. The following
names of their gentes were given to the author in 1880 by
Tatañka-waka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Mysterious Buffalo-bull: 1, Iyak'oza (Iyaḳoza), Lump
(or wart)-on-a-horse's-leg. 2, Tcoka-towela (Ćoka-towela), Blue-spot-in-the-middle.
3, Ciyo-tañka (Ṡiyo-taɳka), Large grouse or prairie chicken.
4, Ho-mna, Fish-smellers. 5, Ciyo-subula (Ṡiyo-subula), Sharp-tail
grouse. 6, Ka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>xi-yuha (Kaɳġi-yuha), Raven keepers. 7, Pispiza-witcaca
(Pispiza-wićaṡa), Prairie-dog people. 8, Walexa-u<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-woha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Waleġa uɳ
wohaɳ), Boil-food-with-the-paunch-skin (waleġa). 9, Watceu<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>pa (Waćeuɳpa),
Roasters. 10, Cawala (Ṡawala), Shawnee; the descendants of a
Shawnee chief adopted into the tribe. 11, Ihañkto<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Ihaɳktoɳwaɳ),
Yankton, so called from their mothers, Yankton women; not an original
Sitca<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>xu gens. 12, Naqpaqpa (Naḣpaḣpa), Take-down (their)-leggings
(after returning from war). 13, Apewa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-tañka (Apewaɳ taɳka),
Big manes (of horses).</p>

<p>In 1884 Reverend W.J. Cleveland sent the author the accompanying
diagram (figure 32) and the following list of Sitca<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>xu gentes, containing
names which he said were of very recent origin; 1, Sitca<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>xu<pb n="219" /><anchor id="Pg219" />
proper. 2, Kak'exa (Kakeġa),Making-a-grating-sound. 3a, Hi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-wapa
(Hiɳhaɳ-ṡun-wapa), Toward-the-owl-feather. 3b, Cŭñikaha-napi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>
(Ṡuɳkaha napiɳ), Wears-a-dogskin-around-the-neek, 4, Hi-ha ka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>
wi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Hi-ha kaɳhaɳhaɳ wiɳ), Woman (wiɳ) -the-skin (ha) -of-whose-teeth
(hi) -dangles (kaɳhaɳhaɳ). 5, Hŭñku-wanitca (Huɳku-wanića),
Without-a-mother. 6, Miniskuya-kitc'u<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Miniskuya kićuɳ), Wears
salt. 7a, Kiyuksa, Breaks-or-cuts-in-two-his-own (custom, etc; probably
referring to the marriage law; see Mdewaka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>to<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> gens number
1). 7b, Ti-glabu, Drums-iu-his-own-lodge. 8, Watceŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>pa (Waćeuɳpa),
Boasters. 9, Wagluqe (Wagluḣe), Followers, commonly called loafers;
A.L. Riggs thinks the word means "in-breeders." 10, Isa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>yati
(Isaɳyati), Santee (probably derived from the Mdewaka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>to<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>). 11,
Wagmeza-yuha, Has corn. 12a, Walexa-o<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-woha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Waleġa-oɳ-wohaɳ),
Boils-with-the-paunch-skin. 12b, Waqna (Waḣna), Snorts. 13, Oglala-itc'itcaxa
(Oglala-ićićaġa), Makes-himself-an-Oglala. 14, Tiyotcesli
(Tiyoćesli), Dungs-in-the-lodge. 15, Wajaja (Waźaźa), Osage (?). 16,
Ieska-tci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>tca (Ieska-ćiɳća), Interpreter's
sons; "half-bloods." 17, Ohe-no<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>pa
(Ohe-noɳpa), Two boilings or kettles.
18, Okaxa-witcaca (Okaġa-wićaṡa),
Man-of-the-south.</p>

<figure url="images/image03.png" rend="floatleft; w50">
<index index="fig" />
<head>FIG. 32.—Sitca<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>xu camping circle.</head>
<figDesc>Illustration: FIG. 32.—Sitca<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>xu camping circle.</figDesc></figure>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE ITAZIPTCO</head>

<p>The Itaziptco (Itazipćo), in full, Itazipa-tcoda<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>
(Itazipa-ćodaɳ), Without-bows
or Sans Arcs, had seven gentes,
according to Waanata<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> or Charger, in
1880 and 1884: 1, Itaziptco-qtca (Itazipćo-ḣća),
Real Itaziptco, also called
Mini-cala (Mini-ṡala), Red water. 2,
Cina-luta-oi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Ṡina-luta-oiɳ), Scarlet-cloth-earring. 3, Woluta-yuta,
Eat-dried-venison (or buffalo meat) -from-the-hind-quarter. 4, Maz-peg-naka,
Wear (pieces-of) -metal-in-the-hair. 5, Tatañka-tcesli (Tataɳka-ćesli),
Dung-of-a-buffalo-bull. 6, Cikcitcela (Ṡikṡićela), Bad-ones-of-different-kinds.
7, Tiyopa-otca<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>nu<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>pa (Tiyopa-oćaɳnuɳpa), Smokes-at-the-entrance-to-the-lodge.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE SIHA-SAPA OR BLACKFEET</head>

<p>The following are the gentes of the Siha-sapa or Blackfeet as given
by Peji or John Grass, in 1880: 1, Siha-sapa-qtca, Real Blackfeet. 2,
Ka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>xi-cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-pegnaka (Kaɳġi-ṡuɳ-pegnaka), Wears-raven-feathers-in-the-hair.
3, Glagla-hetca (Glagla-heća), Untidy, slovenly ("Too lazy to tie
their moccasins"). 4, Wajaje (Waźaźe; Kill Eagle's band; named affcer
Kill Eagle's father, who was a Wajaje of the Oglala tribe). 5, Hohe,
Asiniboin. 6, Wamnuxa-oin (Wamnuġa-oiɳ), Shell-ear-pendant. In
1884 Reverend H. Swift obtained the following from Waanata<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> or
Charger as the true list of Siha-sapa gentes: 1, Ti-zapta<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Ti-zaptaɳ),<pb n="220" /><anchor id="Pg220" />
Five lodges. 2, Siha-sapa-qtca, Heal Blackfeet. 3, Hohe, Asiniboin.
4, Ka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>xi-cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-pegnaka (as above). 5, Wajaje (as above). 6, Wamnuxa-oi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>
(as above). Mr Swift stated that there was no Siha-sapa division
called Glagla-hetca.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE MINIKOOJU</head>

<p>In 1880 Tatañka-wanbli, or Buffalo-bull Eagle, gave the author the
names of numbers 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, and 8 of the following list of the
Minikooju (Minikooźu), Minika<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ye-woju (Minikaɳye-woźu), or Minneconjou
gentes. These were given in 1884, with numbers 4 and 9,
to Reverend H. Swift by No Heart (Ćaɳte-wanića): 1, Ŭñktce-yuta
(Uɳkće-yuta), Eat-dung. 2, Glagla-hetca (Glagla-heća), Slovenly. 3,
Cuñka-yute-cni (Ṡuɳka yute-ṡni), Eat-no-dogs. 4, Nixe-tañka (Niġe-taɳka),
Big-belly. 5, Wakpoki<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ya<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Wakpokiɳyaɳ), Flies-along-the-creek
(wakpa). 6, I<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ya<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-ha-oi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Iɳyan-h-oiɳ), Musselshell-earring. 7,
Cikcitcela (Ṡikṡićela), Bad-ones-of-different-sorts. 8, Wagleza-oi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>,
Watersnake-earring. 9, Wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-nawexa (Waɳ-naweġa), Broken-arrows.
The Wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>nawexa are nearly extinct.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" level1="THE OOHE-NONPA OR TWO KETTLES" />
<head>THE OOHE-NO<hi rend="vertical-align: super">N</hi>PA OR TWO KETTLES</head>

<p>Of the Oohe-no<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>pa (Oohe-no<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>pa), Two Boilings or Two Kettles, Charger
knew the names of only two gentes, which he gave to Reverend H.
Swift in 1884, as follows: 1, Oohe-no<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>pa, Two-boilings. 2, Ma-waqota
(Ma-waḣota), Skin-smeared-with-whitish-earth.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE OGLALA</head>

<p>The first list of Oglala gentes was obtained in 1879 from Reverend
John Robinson and confirmed in 1880 by a member of the tribe. These
gentes are as follows: 1, Payabya, Pushed-aside. 2, Tapicletca (Tapiṡleća),
Spleen (of an animal). 3, Kiyuksa, Breaks-his-own (marriage
custom). 4, Wajaja (Waźaźa. See the Siha-sapa list of gentes). 5,
Ite-citca (Ite-ṡića), Bad-face, or Oglala-qtca (Oglala-ḣća), Real Oglala.
6, Oyuqpe (Oyuḣpe); identical with Oiyuqpe of the next list. 7, Wagluqe
(Wagluḣe). Followers or Loafers. These were probably the
earlier divisions of the Oglala, but by 1884 considerable segregation
had been accomplished, as shown by the following list furnished by
Reverend W.J. Cleveland: 1, Ite-citca (Ite-ṡića), Bad-face, under
Maqpiya-luta, Scarlet Cloud ("Red Cloud"). 2, Payabyeya, Pushed-aside
(under Taṡuɳka-kokipapi, They-fear-even-his-horse; wrongly rendered
Man-afraid-of-his-horses). 3, Oyuqpe (Oyuḣpe), Thrown down
or unloaded. 4, Tapicletca, Spleen (of an animal). 5, Pe-cla (Pe-ṡla),
Baldhead. 6, Tceq-huha-to<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Ćeḣ-huha-toɳ), Kettle-with-legs. 7,
Wablenitca (Wablenića), Orphans. 8, Pe-cla-ptcetcela (Pe-ṡla-ptećela),
Short-baldhead. 9, Tacnahetca (Taṡnaheća), Gopher. 10, I-wayusota,
Uses-up-by-begging-for, "Uses-up-with-the-mouth." 11, Waka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Wakaɳ),
Mysterious. 12a, Iglaka-teqila (Iglaka-teḣila), Refuses-to-move-camp.
12b, Ite-citca, Bad-face (as number 1). 13, Ite-citca-eta<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>
(Ite-ṡića-etaɳhaɳ), "From-bad-face," Part-of-bad-face. 14, Zuzetca-kiyaksa
(Zuzeća kiyaksa), Bit-the-snake-in-two. 15, Watceo<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>pa (Waće-oɳpa),<pb n="221" /><anchor id="Pg221" />
Boasters. 16, Watcape (Waćape), Stabber. 17, Tiyotcesli
(Tiyoćesli), Dungs-in-the-lodge. 18 and 19, Wagluqe, Followers or
Loafers. 20, Oglala, Scattered-her-own. 21, Ieska-tci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>tca (Ieska-ćinca),
Interpreter's sous, "Half-bloods."</p>

<p>According to Mr Cleveland the whole Oglala tribe had two other
names, Oyuqpe, Thrown-down or unloaded, and Kiyaksa, Bit-it-in-two.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" level1="THE HUNKPAPA" />
<head>THE HUÑKPAPA</head>

<p>The name Huñkpapa (sometimes corrupted into Uncpapa, Oncpapa,
etc), should be compared with the Yanktonai name Huñkpatina; both
refer to the huñkpa or ends of a tribal circle. A Huñkpapa man in
1880 gave the following as the names of the gentes: 1, Tcañka-oqa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>
(Ćaɳka-oḣaɳ) Sore-backs (of horses), not the original name. 2, Tce-oqba
(Će-oḣba), in which tce (će) has either a vulgar meaning or is a
contraction of tceya (ćeya), to weep, and oqba (oḣba), sleepy. 3,
Tinazipe-citca (Tinazipe-ṡića), Bad-bows.
4, Talo-nap'i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Talo-napiɳ),
Fresh-meat-necklace. 5, Kiglacka
(Kiglaṡka), Ties-his-own. 6, Tcegnake-okisela
(Ćegnake-okisela), Half-a-breechcloth.
7, Cikcitcela (Ṡikṡićela),
Bad-ones-of-different-sorts. 8, Waka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>
(Wakaɳ), Mysterious. 9, Hŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ska-tca<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>tojuha
(Huɳska-ćaɳtoźuha), Legging-tobacco-pouch.</p>

<figure url="images/image04.png" rend="floatleft; w50">
<index index="fig" />
<head>FIG. 33.—Oglala camping circle.</head>
<figDesc>Illustration: FIG. 33.—Oglala camping circle.</figDesc></figure>

<p>The real foundation for the totemic
system exists among the Dakota, as
well as among the other Siouan tribes
and the Iroquois, in the names of men often being taken from mythical
animals, but, in the opinion of Dr S.R. Riggs, the system was never
carried to perfection.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>DAKOTA SOCIAL CUSTOMS</head>

<p>Among the eastern Dakota the phratry was never a permanent organization,
but it was resorted to on special occasions and for various
purposes, such as war or the buffalo hunt. The exponent of the phratry
was the tiyotipi or "soldiers' lodge," which has been described at
length by Dr Riggs.<note place="foot"><p>Contributions to North American Ethnology, vol. ix, pp. 195-202.</p></note></p>

<p>While no political organization has been known to exist within the
historic period over the whole Dakota nation, the traditional alliance of
the "Seven Council-fires" is perpetuated in the common name Dakota,
signifying allied, friendly.</p>

<p>Among the Dakota it is customary for the rank and title of chief to
descend from father to son, unless some other near relative is ambitious
and influential enough to obtain the place. The same is claimed also in
regard to the rank of brave or soldier, but this position is more dependent<pb n="222" /><anchor id="Pg222" />
on personal bravery. While among the Omaha and Ponka a chief
can not lead in war, there is a different custom among the Dakota.
The Sisseton chief Standing Buffalo told Little Crow, the leader of the
hostile Santee in the Minnesota outbreak of 1862, that, having commenced
hostilities with the whites, he must fight it out without help
from him, and that, failing to make himself master of the situation, he
should not flee through the country of the Sisseton.</p>

<p>Regarding chieftainship among the Dakota, Philander Prescott<note place="foot"><p>Schoolcraft, Indian Tribes, vol. II, 182, Philadelphia. 1852.</p></note> says:</p>

<quote rend="display">
<p>The chieftainship is of modern date, there being no chiefs hefore the whites came.
The chiefs have little power. The chief's band is almost always a kin totem which
helps to sustain him. The chiefs have no votes in council; there the majority rules
and the voice of the chief is not decisive till then.</p>

<p>On the death of a chief, the nearest kinsman in the right line is eligible. If there
are no kin, the council of the band can make a chief. Civil chiefs scarcely ever
make a war party.</p>
</quote>

<p>The Dakota woman owns the tipi. If a man has more wives than
one, they have separate tipis, or they arrange to occupy different sides
of one. Sometimes the young man goes to live with his wife's kindred,
but in such matters there is no fixed rule. To purchase a wife was
regarded the most honorable form of marriage, though elopement was
sometimes resorted to.</p>
</div>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE ASINIBOIN</head>

<p>The Asiniboin were originally part of the Wazi-kute gens of the
Yanktonai (Ihañkto<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>na) Dakota. According to the report of E.T.
Denig to Governor I.I. Stevens,<note place="foot"><p>Manuscript in the archives of the Bureau of Ethnology.</p></note> "the Asiniboin call themselves Dakota,
meaning Our people." The Dakota style them Hohe, "rebels," but
Denig says the term signifies "fish eaters," and that they may have
been so called from the fact that they subsisted principally on fish while
in British territory.</p>

<p>Lists of the gentes of this people have been recorded by Denig, Maximilian,
and Hayden, but in the opinion of the present writer they
need revision.</p>

<p rend="text-align: center"><hi rend="font-style: italic">Asiniboin gentes</hi></p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.5cm}|p{2.5cm}|p{2.5cm}'">
<row>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Denig</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Maximilian</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hayden</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>We-che-ap-pe-nah, 60 lodges, under Les Yeux Gris</cell><cell>Itschcabinè, Les gens des filles.</cell><cell>Wi-ić-ap-i-naḣ, Girls' band.</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>E-an-to-ah, Stone Indians, the original appellation for the whole nation; 50 lodges, under Premier qui Voile.</cell>
<cell>Jatonabinè, Les gens des roches, the Stone Indians of the English.  Call themselves "Eascab."</cell>
<cell>I'-an-to'-an. Either I<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ya<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> to<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Stone Village or Ihankto<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, End village or Yankton. J.O.D.)</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>Wah-to-pan-ah, Canoe Indians, 100 lodges, under Serpent.</cell><cell>Otaopabinè, Les gens des canots.</cell><cell>Waḣ-to'-pap-i-naḣ</cell>
</row>
<pb n="223" /><anchor id="Pg223" />
<row>
<cell>Wah-to-pah-han-da-toh, Old Gauché's gens, i.e., Those who row in canoes; 100 lodges, under Trembling Hand.</cell>
<cell>Watópachnato, Les gens de l'age.</cell>
<cell>Waḣ-to'-paḣ-an-da-to, Gens du Gauché or Left Hand.</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>Wah-ze-ah we-chas-ta, Northern People (so called because they came from the north in 1839); 60 lodges, under Le Robe de Vent.</cell>
<cell>O-see-gah (of Lewis and Clark, Discoveries, p. 43, 1806).</cell>
<cell>Waḣ-zi-ah, or To-kum-pi, Gens du Nord.</cell>
</row>
</table>

<p>The following gentes have not been collated: Of Maximilian's list,
Otopachgnato, les gens du large, possibly a duplication, by mistake, of
Watopachnato, les gens de l'age; Tschantoga, les gens des bois; Tanin-tauei,
les gens des osayes; Chábin, les gens des montagnes. Of Hayden's
list, Min'-i-shi-nak'-a-to, gens du lac.</p>

<p>The correct form in the Yankton dialect of the first name is Witci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ya<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>pina
(Wićiɳyaɳpina), girls; of the second, probably I<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ya<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>to<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>
(Iɳyaɳ toɳwaɳ); the third and fourth gentes derive their names from
the verb watopa, to paddle a canoe; the fifth is Waziya witcacta
(Waziya wićaṡta). Tschan in Tschantoga is the German notation of
the Dakota tca<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (ćaɳ), tree, wood. Cha in Chábin is the German notation
of the Dakota word ḣe, a high ridge of hills, a mountain.</p>

<p>In his report to Governor Stevens, from which the following information
respecting the Asiniboin is condensed, Denig used the term
"band" to denote a gens of the tribe, and "clans" instead of corporations,
under which latter term are included the feasting and dancing
societies and the orders of doctors, shamans, or theurgists.</p>

<p>These bands are distinct and occupy different parts of the country,
although they readily combine when required by circumstances, such as
scarcity of game or an attack by a large body of the enemy.</p>

<p>The roving tribes call no general council with other nations; indeed,
they are suspicious even of those with whom they have been at peace
for many years, so that they seldom act together in a large body. With
the exception of the Hidatsa, Mandau, and Arikara, who are stationary
and live in a manner together, the neighboring tribes are quite
ignorant of one another's government, rarely knowing even the names
of the principal chiefs and warriors.</p>

<p>In all these tribes there is no such thing as hereditary rank. If a
son of a chief is wanting in bravery, generosity, or other desirable
qualities, he is regarded merely as an ordinary individual; at the same
time it is true that one qualification for the position of chief consists
in having a large number of kindred in the tribe or gens. Should
there be two or more candidates, equally capable and socially well connected,
the question would be decided on the day of the first removal
of the camp, or else in council by the principal men. In the former<pb n="224" /><anchor id="Pg224" />
case, each man would follow the leader whom he liked best, and the
smaller body of Indians would soon adhere to the majority.</p>

<p>Women are never acknowledged as chiefs, nor have they anything
to say in the council. A chief would be deposed for any conduct causing
general disgust or dissatisfaction, such as incest (marrying within
his gens) or lack of generosity. Though crime in the abstract would
not tend to create dissatisfaction with a chief, yet if he murdered,
without sufficient cause, one whose kindred were numerous, a fight
between the two bodies of kindred would result and an immediate
separation of his former adherents would ensue; but should the murdered
person be without friends, there would be no attempt to avenge
the crime, and the people would fear the chief only the more. To preserve
his popularity a chief must give away all his property, and he is
consequently always the poorest man in the band; but he takes care
to distribute his possessions to his own kindred or to the rich, from
whom he might draw in times of need.</p>

<p>The duties of a leading chief are to study the welfare of his people,
by whom he is regarded as a father, and whom he addresses as his
children. He must determine where the camp should be placed and
when it should be moved; when war parties are advisable and of whom
they should be composed—a custom radically different from that of the
Omaha and Ponka,—and all other matters of like character. Power is
tacitly committed to the leading chief, to be held so long as he governs
to general satisfaction, subject, however, to the advice of the soldiers.
Age, debility, or any other natural defect, or incapacity to act, advise,
or command, would lead a chief to resign in favor of a younger man.</p>

<p>When war is deemed necessary, any chief, soldier, or brave warrior
has the privilege of raising and leading a war party, provided he can
get followers. The powers of a warrior and civil chief may be united
in one person, thus differing from the Omaha and Ponka custom. The
leading chief may and often does lead the whole band to war; in fact,
it devolves on him to lead any general expedition.</p>

<p>The Akitcita (Akićita), soldiers or guards (policemen), form an important
body among the Asiniboin as they do among the other Siouan
tribes. These soldiers, who are chosen from the band on account of
their bravery, are from 25 to 45 years of age, steady, resolute, and
respected; and in them is vested the power of executing the decisions
of the council. In a camp of 200 lodges these soldiers would number
from 50 to 60 men; their lodge is pitched in the center of the camp and
is occupied by some of them all the time, though the whole body is
called together only when the chief wishes a public meeting or when
their hunting regulations are to be decided. In their lodge all tribal
and intertribal business is transacted, and all strangers, both white
men and Indians, are domiciled. The young men, women, and children
are not allowed to enter the soldiers' lodge during the time that tribal
matters are being considered, and, indeed, they are seldom, if ever,<pb n="225" /><anchor id="Pg225" />
seen there. All the choicest parts of meat and the tongues of animals
killed in hunting are reserved for the soldiers' lodge, and are furnished
by the young men from time to time. A tax is levied on the camp for
the tobacco smoked there, which is no small quantity, and the women
are obliged to furnish wood and water daily. This lodge corresponds in
some degree to the two sacred lodges of the Hañga gens of the Omaha.</p>

<p>Judging from the meager information which we possess concerning
the Asiniboin kinship system, the latter closely resembles that of the
Dakota tribes, descent being in the male line. After the smallpox
epidemic of 1838, only 400 thinly populated lodges out of 1,000
remained, relationship was nearly annihilated, property lost, and but
few, the very young and very old, were left to mourn the loss. Remnants
of bands had to be collected and property acquired, and several
years elapsed ere the young people were old enough to marry.</p>

<p>The names of the wife's parents are never pronounced by the husband;
to do so would excite the ridicule of the whole camp. The husband
and the father-in-law never look on each other if they can avoid it, nor
do they enter the same lodge. In like manner the wife never addresses
her father-in-law.</p>

<p>A plurality of wives is required by a good hunter, since in the labors
of the chase women are of great service to their husbands. An Indian
with one wife can not amass property, as she is constantly occupied in
household labors, and has no time for preparing skins for trading. The
first wife and the last are generally the favorites, all others being
regarded as servants. The right of divorce lies altogether with the
husband; if he has children by his wife, he seldom puts her away.
Should they separate, all the larger children—those who require no
further care—remain with the father, the smaller ones departing with
the mother. When the women have no children they are divorced
without scruple.</p>

<p>After one gets acquainted with Indians the very opposite of taciturnity
exists. The evenings are devoted to jests and amusing stories
and the days to gambling. The soldiers' lodge, when the soldiers are not
in session, is a very theater of amusement; all sorts of jokes are made
and obscene stories are told, scarcely a woman in the camp escaping
the ribaldry; but when business is in order decorum must prevail.</p>

<p>The personal property of these tribes consists chiefly of horses.
Possession of an article of small value is a right seldom disputed, if the
article has been honestly obtained; but the possession of horses being
almost the principal object in life of an Indian of the plains, the retention
of them is a matter of great uncertainty, if he has not the large force
necessary to defend them. Rights to property are based on the method
of acquirement, as (1) articles found; (2) those made by themselves
(the sole and undisputed property of the makers); (3) those stolen from
enemies, and (4) those given or bought. Nothing is given except with<pb n="226" /><anchor id="Pg226" />
a view to a gift in return. Property obtained by gambling is held by
a very indefinite tenure.</p>

<p>Murder is generally avenged by the kindred of the deceased, as
among the Omaha and Ponka. Goods, horses, etc, may be offered to
expiate the crime, when the murderer's friends are rich in these things,
and sometimes they are accepted; but sooner or later the kindred of
the murdered man will try to avenge him. Everything except loss of
life or personal chastisement can be compensated among these Indians.
Rape is nearly unknown, not that the crime is considered morally wrong,
but the punishment would be death, as the price of the woman would
be depreciated and the chances of marriage lessened. Besides, it would
be an insult to her kindred, as implying contempt of their feelings and
their power of protection. Marriage within the gens is regarded as
incest and is a serious offense.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE OMAHA</head>

<p>The gentes keeping the sacred pipes and those having the sacred
tents are designated among the Omaha by appropriate designs. The
sacred tent of the Weji<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>cte was the
tent of war, those of the Hañga were
the tents associated with the buffalo
hunt and the cultivation of the soil.
The diameter of the circle (figure 34)
represents the road traveled by the
tribe when going on the buffalo hunt,
numbers 1 and 10 being the gentes
which were always in the van. The
tribe was divided into half tribes, each
half tribe consisting of five gentes.
The sacred tents of the Omaha and all
the objects that were kept in them
are now in the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology at
Cambridge, Massachusetts.</p>

<figure url="images/image05.png" rend="floatleft; w50">
<index index="fig" />
<head>FIG. 34.—Omaha camping circle.</head>
<figDesc>Illustration: FIG. 34.—Omaha camping circle.</figDesc></figure>

<p>The two groups of gentes forming the half tribes or phratries, sometimes
composed of subgentes or sections, are as follows:</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Hañgacenu gentes</hi>—1, Weji<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>cte, Elk. 2, Iñke-sabĕ, Black shoulder,
a Buffalo gens; the custodian of the real pipes of peace. 3, Hañga or
Ancestral, a Buffalo gens; the regulator of all the so-called pipes of
peace and keeper of two sacred tents. 4, ¢atada, meaning uncertain;
in four subgentes: <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, Wasabe hit`ajĭ, Touch-not-the-skin-of-a-black-bear;
<hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, Wajiñga ¢atajĭ, Eat-no-small-birds; Bird people; <hi rend="font-style: italic">c</hi>, ʇe-<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a it`ajĭ,
Touch-no-buffalo-head; Eagle people; <hi rend="font-style: italic">d</hi>, ʞe-`i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Carry-a-turtle-on-the-back;
Turtle people. 5, ʞa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ze, Wind people.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic">Ictasanda gentes</hi>—6, Ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>¢iñka-gaxe, Earth-lodge-makers; coyote and
wolf people. 7, ʇe-sĭnde, Buffalo-tail; a Buffalo-calf people. 8, ʇa-<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a,
Deer-head; Deer people. 9, Iñg¢e-jide, Red dung; a Buffalo-calf gens.<pb n="227" /><anchor id="Pg227" />
10, Icta-sanda, meaning uncertain ("gray eyes"?), said to refer to the
effect of lightning on the eyes. This last gens consists of Thunder and
Reptile people.</p>

<p>The Iñke-sabĕ formerly consisted of four subgentes. When the
gens met as a whole, the order of sitting was that shown in figure 35.
In the tribal circle the Wa¢igije camped next to the Hañga gens, and
the other Iñke-sabĕ people came next to the Weji<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>cte; but in the gentile
"council fire" the first became last and the last first.</p>

<p>The Ieki¢ĕ or Criers.</p>

<p>The Naq¢eit`a-bajĭ, Those-who-touch-no-charcoal.</p>

<p>The three subgentes here named sat on the same side of fireplace.</p>

<p>The Hañga formerly had four subgeutes, but two of them, the Wa¢iita<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>
or Workers, and the Ha-ʇu-it`ajĭ, Touches-no-green(-corn)-husks, are
extinct, the few survivors having joined the other subgentes. The
remaining subgentes are each called by several names: 1, ʇcsa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ha-ʇa¢ica<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>,
pertaining to the sacred skin of an albino buffalo cow, or
Wacabe, Dark buffalo; or Hañga-qti, real
Hañga; or ʇe-¢eze-¢atajĭ, Do-not-eat-buffalo-tongues.
2, Ja<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ha-ʇa¢ica<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, pertaining
to the sacred (cottonwood) bark; or
Waq¢exe-a¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Keeps-the-"spotted-object"
(the sacred pole); or Ja<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-waqube-a¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>,
Keeps-the-sacred-or-mysterious-wood
(pole); or ʇa-waqube-¢atajĭ, Does-not-eat-the-sacred
(mysterious)-buffalo-sides; or
Mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>xa-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-¢atajĭ-kĭ <hi rend="font-weight: bold">P</hi>eta<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-¢atajĭ, Eat-no-geese-or-swans-or-cranes.</p>

<figure url="images/image06.png" rend="floatleft; w50">
<index index="fig" />
<head>FIG. 35.—Iñke-sabĕ gentile assembly. A,
The Wa¢igije, Maze or Whorl, or
Wagnbe-gaxe-aka, He-who-acts-mysteriously.
B, The Wata<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>zi-jide-¢atajĭ,
Those-who-eat-no-red-corn.</head>
<figDesc>Illustration: FIG. 35.—Iñke-sabĕ gentile assembly. A,
The Wa¢igije, Maze or Whorl, or
Wagnbe-gaxe-aka, He-who-acts-mysteriously.
B, The Wata<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>zi-jide-¢atajĭ,
Those-who-eat-no-red-corn.</figDesc></figure>

<p>In the tribal circle the Wacabe camped
next to the Iñke-sabĕ, and the Waqe¢xe-aci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>
were next to the Wasabe-hit`ajĭ subgens
of the ¢atada; but in the Hañga
gentile assembly the positions were reversed,
the Wacabe sitting on the right side of the fire and the
Waq¢exe-a¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> on the left.</p>

<p>The Wasabe-hit`ajĭ subgens of the ¢atada was divided into four sections:
Black-bear, Raccoon, Grizzly-bear, and Porcupine. The only
survivors are the Black-bear and Raccoon (Singers).</p>

<p>The Wajiñga ¢atajĭ subgens was divided into four sections: 1, Hawk
people, under the chief Standing Hawk (now dead). 2, Blackbird people,
under the chief Waji<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>a-gahiga. B, Starling or Thunder people. 4,
Owl and Magpie people.</p>

<p>The ʞa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ze gens was divided into at least two subgentes, the Keepers
of the pipe and the Wind people. Lion, of the Deer-head gens, said
that there were four subgentes, but this was denied in 1882 by Two
Crows of the Hañga gens.</p>

<pb n="228" /><anchor id="Pg228" />

<p>The Ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>¢iñka-gaxe subgentes, as given by Lion, were: 1,
Coyote and Wolf people. 2, I<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>`ĕ-waqube-a¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Keepers-of-the-mysterious-stones.
3, Niniba-t`a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Keepers-of-the-pipe. 4, Mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>xa-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-wet`ajĭ.
Touch(es)-not-swans. Cañge-skă, White Horse, chief of the Ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>¢iñ-ka-gaxe
(in 1878-1880) named three subgentes, thus: 1, Qube, Mysterious
person, a modern name (probably including the Miʞasi and I<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>`ĕ-waqube-a¢i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>,
and certainly consisting of the descendants of the chief Wa-jiñga-sabe
or Blackbird). 2, Niniba-t`a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>. 3, Mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>xa-sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-wet`ajĭ.</p>

<p>The ʇa-<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a were divided into four parts: 1, Niniba-t`a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Keepers-of-the-pipe,
under Lion. 2, Naq¢e-it`ajĭ, Touches-no-charcoal, under Boy
Chief. 3, Thunder-people, under Pawnee Chief. 4, Deer-people, under
Sinde-xa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>xa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (Deer's-)tail-shows-red-at-intervals (-as-it-bounds-away).</p>

<p>The Ictasanda gens also was in four parts: 1, Niniba-t`a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Keepers-of-the-pipe.
2, Real Ictasanda people, (Numbers 1 and 2 were consolidated
prior to 1880.) 3, Waceta<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> or Reptile people, sometimes called
Keepers-of-the-claws-of-a-wildcat. 4, Real Thunder people, or Those-who-do-not-touch-a-clamshell,
or Keepers-of-the-clamshell-and-the-tooth-of-a-black-bear.</p>

<p>The social organization of the Omaha
has been treated at length by the author
in his paper on Omaha Sociology.<note place="foot"><p>Third Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 1881-82.</p></note></p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE PONKA</head>

<p>The Ponka tribal circle was divided
equally between the Tci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ju and Wajaje
half-tribes. To the former belonged two
phratries of two gentes each, i.e., numbers
1 to 4, inclusive, and to the latter
two similar phratries, including gentes 5 to 8.</p>

<figure url="images/image07.png" rend="floatleft; w50">
<index index="fig" />
<head>FIG. 36.—Ponka camping circle.</head>
<figDesc>Illustration: FIG. 36.—Ponka camping circle.</figDesc></figure>

<p>Tci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ju half-tribe—Thunder or Fire phratry: Gens 1, Hisada, Legs-stretched-ont-stiff
(refers to a dead quadruped); Thunder people. Gens
2, Touch-not-the-skin-of-a-black-bear. Wind-makers or War phratry:
Gens 3, ¢ixida, Wildcat (in two subgentes: 1, Sinde-ag¢ĕ, Wears-tails,
i.e., locks of hair; Naq¢e-it`ajĭ, Does-not-touch-charcoal; and Wascʇu-it`ajĭ,
Does-not-tonch-verdigris. 2, Wami-it`ajĭ, Does-not-touch-blood).
Gens 4, Nika-<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a-ɔna, "Bald human-head;" Elk people (in at least three
subgentes: 1, ʇe-sĭnde-it`ajĭ, Does-not-touch-a-buffalo-tail; 2, ʇe ¢eze
¢atajĭ, Does-not-eat-buffalo-tongues; 3, ʇaqti kĭ A<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>pa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> ¢atajĭ, Does-not-eat-deer-and-elk).</p>

<p>Wajaje half-tribe—Earth phratry: Gens 5, Maʞa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Medicine, a buffalo
gens, also called ʇe-sĭnde it`ajĭ, Does-not-touch-buffalo-tails (in
two subgentes: 1, Real Ponka, Keepers-of-a-sacred-pipe; 2, Gray
Ponka). Gens 6, Wacabe, Dark buffalo (in two subgentes: 1,<pb n="229" /><anchor id="Pg229" />
Buffalo tail, or,ʇe-¢eze ¢atajĭ, Does-not-eat-buffalo-tongues, or ʇe-jiñga
¢atajĭ, Does-not-eat-a-very-young-buffalo-calf; 2, ʇe-<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a it`ajĭ, Does-not-touch-a-buffalo-head
or skull). Water phratry (?): Gens 7, Wajaje,
Osage (in two subgentes at present: 1, Dark Osage, Keepers-of-a-sacred-pipe,
or Waseʇu-it`ajĭ, Does-not-touch-verdigris, or Naq¢e-it`ajĭ,
Does-not-touch-charcoal; 2, Gray Osage, or Wĕs`ă wet`ajĭ, Does-not-touch-serpents;
3, Necta, an Owl subgens, now extinct). Gens 8, Nuqe,
Reddish-yellow buffalo (miscalled Nuxe, Ice). Subgentes uncertain, but
there are four taboo names: Does-not-touch-a-Buffalo-head (or skull),
Does-not-touch-a-buffalo-calf, Does-not-touch-the-yellow-hide-of-a-buffalo-calf,
and Does-not-eat-buffalo-tongues.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE QUAPAW OR KWAPA</head>

<p>When the Kwapa were discovered by the French they dwelt in five
villages, described by the early chroniclers as the Imaha (Imaham,
Imahao), Capaha, Toriman, Tonginga (Doginga, Topinga), and Southois
(Atotchasi, Ossouteouez). Three of these village names are known
to all the tribe: 1, Uʞa'qpa-qti, Real Kwapa; 2, Ti'-u-a'-d¢i-ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>
(Toriman), Ti'-u-a-d¢i' ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> (of Mrs Stafford); 3, U-zu'-ti-u'-wĕ (Southois,
etc). The fourth was Ta<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> ji'ʞa, Small village. Judging from analogy
and the fact that the fifth village, Imaha, was the farthest up
Arkansas river, that village name must have meant, as did the term
Omaha, the upstream people.</p>

<p>The following names of Kwapa gentes were obtained chiefly from
Alphonsus Vallière, a full-blood Kwapa, who assisted the author at
Washington, from December, 1890, to March, 1891:</p>

<p>Na<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'pa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ta, a Deer gens; O<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>phŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> enikaciʞa, the Elk gens; Qid¢
e'nikaci'ʞa, the Eagle gens; Wajiñ'ʞa enikaci'ʞa, the Small-bird gens;
Hañ'ʞa e'nikaci'ʞa, the Hañ'ʞa or Ancestral gens; Wasa' e'nikaci'ʞa,
the Black-bear gens; Ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>tu' e'nikaci'ʞa, the Grizzly-bear (?) gens; Te
e'nikaci'ʞa, the Buffalo gens (the ordinary buffalo); Tuqe'-nikaci'ʞa,
the Reddish-yellow Buffalo gens (answering to Nuqe of the Ponka,
Yuqe of the Kansa, ¢uqe of the Osage); Jawe' nikaci'ʞa, the Beaver
gens; Hu i'nikaci'ʞa, the Fish gens; Mika'q`e ni'kaci'ʞa, the Star gens;
Pe'ta<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> e'nikaci'ʞa, the Crane gens; Cañʞe'-nikaci'ʞa, the Dog (or
Wolf?) gens; Wakan'ʇă e'nikaci'ʞa, the Thunder-being gens; Ta<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>d¢a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'
e'nikaci'ʞa or Ta<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'d¢a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> tañ'ʞa e'nikaci'ʞa, the Panther or Mountain-lion
gens; Ke-ni'kaci'ʞa, the Turtle gens; Wĕs`ă e'nikaci'ʞa, the Serpent
gens; Mi e'nikaci'ʞa, the Sun gens. Vallière was unable to say
on which side of the tribal circle each gens camped, but he gave the
personal names of some members of most of the gentes.</p>

<p>On visiting the Kwapa, in the northeastern corner of Indian Territory,
in January, 1894, the author recorded the following, with the assistance
of Mrs Stafford, a full-blood Kwapa of about 90 years of age: Among<pb n="230" /><anchor id="Pg230" />
the Hañka gentes are the Hañ'ʞa tañʞa, Large Hañʞa or Ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>cka'
e'nikaci'ʞa, Crawfish people; Wajiñʞa e'nikaci'ʞa, Small-bird people;
Jiñ'ʞa e'nikaci'ʞa, Small-bird people; Te ni'kaci'ʞa, Buffalo people, or
Hañ'ʞa ji'ʞa, Small Hañʞa; A<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'pa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> e'nikaci'ʞa, Elk people; Qid¢a'
e'nikaci'ʞa, Eagle people; Tuqe'-nikaci'ʞa, Reddish-yellow Buffalo
people; and Cañʞe'-nikaci'ʞa, Dog (or Wolf?) people. Mrs Stafford
knew that five gentes were not on the Hañʞa side, three of them, Hu
i´'nikaci'ʞa, Fish people, Ni'kia'ta (meaning unknown), and Ke-ni'kaci'ʞa,
Turtle people, being on the same side; Ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>tu' e'nikaci'ʞa, Lion
people; and Ti'ju (answering to the Osage Tsiɔu, the Kansa Tciju, and
the Ponka Tci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ju), meaning not obtained, which last is extinct. Mrs
Stafford could not tell on which side camped any of the following
gentes given by Vallière: Maqe, Wĕs`ă, Wasa, Jawe, Mikaq`e, Mi, etc.
The only persons capable of giving the needed information are among
those Kwapa who reside on Osage reservation. According to George
Redeagle and Buffalo Calf, two full-blood Quapaw, the Maqe-nikaci'ʞa,
Upper World people, were identical
with the Wakanʇa e'nikaci'ʞa,
Thunder-being people, of Vallière.
These two men said, also, that there
was no single gens known as the Hañʞa,
that name belonging to a major division,
probably a half-tribe.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" level1="THE KANZE OR KANSA" />
<head>THE KAƝZE OR KANSA</head>

<figure url="images/image08.png" rend="floatleft; w50">
<index index="fig" />
<head>FIG. 37.—Kansa camping circle.</head>
<figDesc>Illustration: FIG. 37.—Kansa camping circle.</figDesc></figure>

<p>Among the Omaha the Yata people
are those who camp on the yata or left
side of the tribal circle; the Ictŭñga
people, those who camp on the Ictŭñga
or right side. The tribe is divided into
seven phratries, or, as the Kansa style each, wayu<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>da<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, (i.e., those
who sing together), as follows:</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{1cm}|p{2cm}|p{4cm}'">
<row>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Phratries</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Gentes</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Subgentes</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>I</cell>
<cell>1. Ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>yiñka, Earth, or Earth-lodge-makers.</cell>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, Ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>yinka tañga, Large earth. <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, Ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>yiñka gaxe,&amp;Ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>yiñka jiñga, Small earth.</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>II</cell>
<cell>2. Ta, Deer, or Wajaje, Osage.</cell>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, Taqtci, Real deer. <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, Ta  yatcajĭ, Eats-no-deer, or Ta ts'eyĕ, Kills-deer, or Wadjüta ts'eyĕ, Kills-quadrupeds.</cell>
</row>
<pb n="231" /><anchor id="Pg231" />
<row>
<cell>III</cell>
<cell>3. Pañka, Ponka</cell>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, Pañk unikaci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ga, Ponka people. <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, Qŭndj-ala<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Wear-red-cedar (-fronds)-on-their-heads.</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>III</cell>
<cell>4. Ka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ze, Kansa, or Tci haci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Lodge-in-the-rear; Last-lodge.</cell>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, Tadje unikaci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ga, Wind people, or Ak'a unikaci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ga, South-wind people, or Tci haci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>qtci, Real Tci haci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Camp-behind-all. <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, Tadje jiñga, Small-wind, or Ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>na<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>hind-je, Makes-a breeze-near-the-ground.</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>III</cell>
<cell>5. Wasabe, Black bear.</cell>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, Wasabĕqtci, Real Black-bear, or Sakŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> wayatce, Eats-raw (-food). <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, Sindjalĕ, Wears-tails (locks of hair) -on-the-head.</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>I</cell>
<cell>6. Wanaxe, Ghost</cell>
<cell>Not learned.</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>IV</cell>
<cell>7. Ke k'i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Carries-a-turtle-on-his-back.</cell>
<cell>Not learned.</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>V</cell>
<cell>8. Mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> k'i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Carries-the-sun-on-his-back.</cell>
<cell>Not learned.</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>I</cell>
<cell>9. Ṵpa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Elk</cell>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, Ṵpa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-qtci, Real elk, or Ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ha, referring to the color of the fur. <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, Sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ge, meaning unknown.</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>VI</cell>
<cell>10. Qüya, White eagle</cell>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, Hüsada, Legs-stretched-out-stiff; Qüyunikaci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ga, White-eagle people. <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, Wabi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> ijupye, Wade-in-blood; Wabi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> unikaci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ga, Blood people.</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>VI</cell>
<cell>11. Ha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Night</cell>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, Ha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> nikaci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ga, Night people. <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, Daka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>yi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Walks-shining (Star people?)</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>VII</cell>
<cell>12. Ibatc`ĕ, Holds-the-firebrand-to-sacred-pipes, or Hañga jiñga, small Hañga.</cell>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, Qüyego jiñga, Hawk-that-has-a-tail-like-a-"king-eagle;" "Little-one-like-an-eagle." <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, Mika unikaci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ga, Raccoon people, or Mika qla jiñga, Small lean racoon.</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>VII</cell>
<cell>13. Hañga tañga, Large Hañga; Hañga utanandji, Hañga-apart-from-the-rest, or Ta sindje qaga, Stiff-deer-tail.</cell>
<cell>A black eagle with spots. Subgentes not recorded.</cell>
</row>
<pb n="232" /><anchor id="Pg232" />
<row>
<cell>II</cell>
<cell>14. Tcedŭñga, Buffalo (bull), or Sitañga, Big feet.</cell>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, Tcedŭñga, Buffalo with dark hair. <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, Yuqe, Reddish-yellow Buffalo. (See Ponka Nuqe, Osage ¢uqe, Kwapa Tuqe.)</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>V</cell>
<cell>15. Tci ju wactage, Tci-ju peacemaker.</cell>
<cell>(Red-hawk people?). Subgentes not recorded.</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>II</cell>
<cell>16. Lṵ nikaci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ga, Thunder-being people; Leda<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> unikaci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ga, Gray-hawk people.</cell>
<cell>Subgentes not recorded.</cell>
</row>
</table>

<p>Great changes have occurred among the Kansa since they have come
in contact with the white race; but when Say visited them in the early
part of the present century they still observed their aboriginal marriage
laws. No Kansa could take a wife from a gens on his side of the
tribal circle, nor could he marry any kinswoman, however remote the
relationship might be. There are certain gentes that exchange personal
names (jaje kik'übe au), as among the Osage. Civil and military
distinctions were based on bravery and generosity. Say informs us
that the Kansa had been at peace with the Osage since 1806; that they
had intermarried freely with them, so that "in stature, features, and
customs they are more and more closely approaching that people."
He states also that the head chief of the Kansa was Gahi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ge Wadayiñga,
Saucy Chief (which he renders "Fool Chief"), and that the ten
or twelve underchiefs did not seem to have the respect of the people.</p>

<p>Unmarried females labored in the fields, served their parents, carried
wood and water, and cooked. When the eldest daughter married
she controlled the lodge, her mother, and all the sisters; the latter were
always the wives of the same man. Presents were exchanged when a
youth took his first wife. On the death of the husband the widow
scarified herself, rubbed her person with clay, and became careless
about her dress for a year. Then the eldest brother of the deceased
married her without any ceremony, regarding her children as his own.
When the deceased left no brother (real or potential) the widow was
free to select her next husband. Fellowhood (as in cases of Damon
and Pythias, David and Jonathan) often continues through life.</p>

<p>The Kansa had two kinds of criers or heralds: 1, the wadji'pa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>yi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>
or village crier; 2, the ie'kiye'(Omaha and Ponka i'ĕki'¢ĕ. In 1882,
Sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>sile (a woman) was hereditary wadji'pa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>yi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> of the Kansa, having
succeeded her father, Pezihi, the last male crier. At the time of an<pb n="233" /><anchor id="Pg233" />
issue (about 1882) Sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>sile's son-in-law died, so she, being a mourner,
could not act as crier; hence her office devolved on K'axe of the Taqtci
subgens. In that year one of the Ta yatcajĭ subgens (of the Taqtci
or Deer gens) was iekiye number 1. Iekiye number 2 belonged to the
Tadje or Ka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ze (Wind) gens.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE OSAGE</head>

<p>In the Osage nation there are three primary divisions, which are
tribes in the original acceptation of that term. These are known as
the Tsiɔu utse pe¢ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi><hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a, the Seven Tsiɔu fireplaces, Hañʞa utsse pe¢ŭ<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a,
the Seven Hañʞa fireplaces, and Waɔaɔe utse pe¢ŭ<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a, the Seven Osage
fireplaces. Each "fireplace" is a gens, so that there are twenty-one
gentes in the Osage nation. The Seven Hañʞa fireplaces were the
last to join the nation, according to the tradition of the Tsiɔu wactaʞe
people. When this occurred, the seven Hañʞa gentes were reckoned
as five, and the seven Osage gentes as two, in order to have not more
than seven gentes on the right side of the tribal circle.</p>

<p>At first the Hañʞa uta¢antse gens had seven pipes, and the Waɔaɔe
had as many. The Waɔaɔe gave their
seventh pipe to the Tsiɔu, with the right
to make seven pipes from it, so now the
Waɔaɔe people have but six pipes, though
they retain the ceremonies pertaining to
the seventh.</p>

<figure url="images/image09.png" rend="floatleft; w50">
<index index="fig" />
<head>FIG. 38.—Osage camping circle.</head>
<figDesc>Illustration: FIG. 38.—Osage camping circle.</figDesc></figure>

<p>When there is sickness among the children
on the Waɔaɔe or right (war) side of
the circle, their parents apply to the Tsiɔu
(Tsiɔu wactaʞe?) for food for them. In
like manner, when the children on the left
or Tsiɔu side are ill, their parents apply to
the Pa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>hka (wactaqe?), on the other side, in order to get food for them.</p>

<p>The Seven Tsiɔu fireplaces occupy the left or peace side of the
circle. Their names are:</p>

<p>1. Tsiɔu Sĭntsaʞ¢e, Tsiɔu-wearing-a-tail (of hair)-on-the-head; also
called Tsiɔu Wanŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>', Elder Tsiɔu; in two subgentes, Sintsaʞ¢ĕ, Sun
and Comet people, and Cŭñʞe i'nik`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'a, Wolf people.</p>

<p>2. Tse ʇṵ'ʞa intse', Buffalo-bull face; in two subgentes, of which the
second is Tse' ¢añka' or Mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'paha', Hide-with-the-hair-on. The policemen
or soldiers on the left side belong to these two gentes.</p>

<p>3. Mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> k'i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>', Sun carriers, i.e., Carry-the-snn (or Buffalo hides)-on-their-backs.
These have two subgentes, <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, Mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>i'niɥk`aci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'a, Sun people;
<hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, Mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>xa' ska i'niɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'a, Swan people,</p>

<p>4. Tsi'ɔu wacta'ʞe, Tsiɔu peacemaker, or Ta<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ʞa'xe, Village-maker,
or, Ni'wa¢ĕ, Giver of life. These have two subgentes, <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, Wapi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>
it`a'ɔi, Touches-no-blood, or Qü¢a' ɔü'tse, Red-eagle (really a hawk);<pb n="234" /><anchor id="Pg234" />
<hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, Qü¢a' pa sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>', Bald-eagle, or Ɔa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'u'niɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'a, Sycamore people,
the leading gens on the left side of the circle.</p>

<p>5. Ha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> i'niɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'a, Night people, or Tsi'ɔu we'haʞi¢e, the Tsiɔu-at-the-end,
or Tse'¢añka'. Their two subgentes are: <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, Night people
proper; <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, Wasa'<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e, Black-bear people.</p>

<p>6. Tse ʇṵ'ʞa, Buffalo bull. In two subgentes, <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, Tse ʇṵ'ʞa, Buffalo
bull; <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, ¢u'qe, Reddish-yellow buffalo (corresponding to the Nuqe of
the Ponka, Tuqe of the Quapaw, and Yuqe of the Kansa).</p>

<p>7. ʞ¢ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Thunder-being, or Tsi'haci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Camp-last, or Ma'xe, Upper-world
people, or Niɥ'ka wakan'ʇaʞi, Mysterious-male-being. Subgentes
not recorded.</p>

<p>On the right (Hañʞa or Waɔaɔe) side of the circle are the following:</p>

<p>8. Waɔa'ɔe Wanŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>', Elder Osage, composed of six of the seven
Osage fireplaces, as follows: <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, Waɔa'ɔe ska', White Osage; <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, Ke
k'i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>', Turtle-carriers; <hi rend="font-style: italic">c</hi>, Wake'¢e ste'tse, Tall-flags(?), Ehna<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>' min'tse
tŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>', They-alone-have-bows, or Mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ke'¢e ste'tse, Tall-flags; <hi rend="font-style: italic">d</hi>, Ta ¢a'xü,
Deer-lights, or Ta i'niɥk'ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'a, Deer people; <hi rend="font-style: italic">e</hi>, Hu i'niqk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'a, Fish
people; <hi rend="font-style: italic">f</hi>, Na<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'pa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ta, a deer gens, called by some Ke ʞa'tsü, Turtle-with-a-serrated-crest-along-the-shell
(probably a water monster, as there
is no such species of turtle).</p>

<p>9. Hañ'ʞa uta'¢antsi, Hañʞa-apart-from-the-rest, or Qü¢a'qtsi i'niɥ-k`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'a,
Real eagle people—the War eagle gens, and one of the original
Hañʞa fireplaces. The soldiers or policemen from the right side are
chosen from the eighth and ninth gentes.</p>

<p>10. The leading gens on the right side of the circle, and one of the
original seven Osage fireplaces. Pa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ɥ'ka wacta'ʞe, Ponka peace-maker,
according to a Tsiɔu man; in two subgentes, <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, Tse'wa¢ĕ, Pond-lily,
and <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, Waca'<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e, Dark-buffalo; but according to Pa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ɥ'ka waʇa'yinʞa,
a member of the gens, his people have three subgentes, <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, Wake'¢e,
Flags; <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, Wa'tsetsi, meaning, perhaps, Has-come hither (tsi)-after-touching-the-foe
(watse); <hi rend="font-style: italic">c</hi>, Qŭntse', Red cedar.</p>

<p>11. Hañ'ʞa a'hü tŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>', Hañʞa-having-wings, or Hü'saʇa, Limbs-stretched-stiff,
or Qü¢ i'niɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'a, White-eagle people, in two subgentes,
which were two of the original Hañʞa fireplaces: <hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>, Hü'saʇa
Wanŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>', Elder Hüsaʇa; <hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>, Hü'saʇa, those wearing four locks of hair
resembling those worn by the second division of the Wasape tu<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>.</p>

<p>12. Wasa'<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e tŭn, Having-black-bears. In two parts, which were
originally two of the Hañʞa fireplaces: A, Sĭntsaʞ¢sĕ, Wearing-a-tail-
(or lock)-of-hair-on-the-head; in two subgentes, (<hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>) Wasa<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e, Black
bear, or Hañ'ʞa Wa'ts`ekawa' (meaning not learned); (<hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>) Iñʞ¢ŭñ'ʞa
ɔiũ'ʞa, Small cat. B, Wasa'<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e tŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Wearing-four-locks-of-hair, in two
subgentes, (<hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>) Mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>xa'ska, Swan; (<hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>) Tse'wa¢ĕ qe'ʞa, Dried pond-lily.</p>

<p>13. Ṵ'pqa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Elk, one of the seven Hañʞa fireplaces.</p>

<p>14. Ka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'se, Kansa, or I'<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>ats`ĕ, Holds-a-firebrand-to-the-sacred-pipes-in-order-to-light-them,
or A'k`a i'niɥak`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'a, South-wind people, or
Tatse' i'niɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'a, Wind people, or Pe'tse i'niɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'a, Fire people.
One of the seven Hañʞa fireplaces.</p>

<pb n="235" /><anchor id="Pg235" />

<p>The following social divisions cannot be identified: Ɔa'<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>e i`niɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'a,
Beaver people, said to be a subgens of the Waɔaɔe, no gens
specified; Pe'tqa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> i'niɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'a, Crane people, said to be a subgens of
the Hañʞa(?) sĭntsaʞ¢ĕ; Wapŭñ'ʞa i'niɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'a, Owl people; Ma<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>yiñ'ʞa
i'niɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'a, Earth people; <hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>aqpü' i'niɥk`ăci<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'a, meaning not recorded.</p>

<p>There is some uncertainty respecting the true positions of a few
subgentes in the camping circle. For instance, Alvin Wood said that
the Tsewa¢e qeʞa formed the fourth subgens of the Tse ʇṵ'ʞa intse;
but this was denied by ʞahiʞe waʇayiñʞa, of the Tsi'ɔu wacta'ʞe,
who said that it belonged to the Pa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ɥka wactaʞe prior to the extinction
of the subgens. Tsepa ʞaxe of the Wasape gens said that it
formed the fourth subgens of his own people. Some make the Tsiɔu
wactaʞe the third gens on the left, instead of the fourth. According
to ʞahiʞe waʇayiñʞa, "All the Waɔaɔe gentes claim to have come from
the water, so they have ceremonies referring to beavers, because those
animals swim in the water." The same authority said in 1883 that
there were seven men who acted as wactaʞe, as follows: 1, Kaɥiʞe
wactaʞe, of the Tsiɔu wactaʞe subgens, who had acted for eight years;
2, Pahü-ska, of the Bald-eagle or Qü¢a pa sa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> subgens; 3, ʞ¢ema<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>,
Clermont, of the
ki<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>ana<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> of the Tsiɔu wehaki¢ĕ or Night gens; 6, Pa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ɥka waʇayiñʞa,
Saucy Ponka, of the Wa'tsetsi or Ponka gens; 7, Niɥka waɔi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> ta<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>a, of
the same gens.</p>

<p>On the death of the head chief among the Osage the leading men
call a council. At this council four men are named as candidates for
the office, and it is asked, "Which one shall be appointed?" At this
council a cuka of the Watsetsi (Ponka gens, or else from some other
gens on the right) carries his pipe around the circle of councilors from
right to left, while a Tsiɔu cuka (one of the Tsiɔu wactaʞe gens, or else
one from some other gens on the left) carries the other pipe around
from left to right. The ceremonies resemble the Ponka ceremonies for
making chiefs. When the chiefs assemble in council a member of the
Ka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>se or I<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>ats`ĕ gens (one on the right) lights the pipes. The criers
are chosen from the Ka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>se, Ṵpqa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, and Mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> k'i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> gentes. The Tsiɔu
Sĭntsaʞ¢ĕ and Tse ʇṵʞa intse gentes furnish the soldiers or policemen
for the Tsiɔu wactaʞe. A similar function is performed for the Pa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ɥka
wactaʞe by the Waɔaɔe wanŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> and Hañʞa uʇa¢antsi gentes. The
Sĭntsaʞ¢ĕ and Hañʞa uʇa¢autsi are "akiʇa watañʞa," chiefs of the
soldiers; the Tseʇṵʞa intse and Waɔaɔe Wanŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> being ordinary soldiers,
i.e., subordinate to the others. The Waɔaɔe Ke k'i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> are the moccasin
makers for the tribe. It is said that in the olden days the members
of this gens used turtle shells instead of moccasins, with leeches for
strings. The makers of the war-standards and war-pipes must belong
to the Waɔaɔe ska.</p>

<p>Saucy Chief is the authority for the following: "Should all the Osage
wish to dwell very near another tribe, or in case two or three families
of us wish to remove to another part of the reservation, we let the<pb n="236" /><anchor id="Pg236" />
others know our desire to live near them. We make up prizes for
them—a pony, a blanket, strouding, etc—and we ask them to race for
them. The fastest horse takes the first prize, and so on. We take
along a pipe and some sticks—one stick for each member of the party
that is removing. The other people meet us and race with us back to
their home. They make us sit in a row; then one of their men or
children brings a pipe to one of our party to whom he intends giving
a horse. The pipe is handed to the rest of the party. The newcomers
are invited to feasts, all of which they are obliged to attend." When
the Osage go on the hunt the Tsiɔu wactaʞe (chief) tells the Sĭntsaʞ¢ĕ
and Tse ʇṵʞa intse where the people must camp. The following evening
the Pa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ɥka wactaʞe (chief) tells the soldiers on his side (the Waɔaɔe
and Hañʞa uʇa¢antsi) where the camp must be on the following day.
The members of the four gentes of soldiers or policemen meet in council
and decide on the time for departure. They consult the Tsiɔu
wactaʞe and Hañʞa (Pa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ɥka wactaʞe?) who attend the council. The
crier is generally a man of either the Ṵpqa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> or Ka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>se gens, but sometimes
a Mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> k'i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> man acts. The four leaders of the soldier gentes call
on the crier to proclaim the next camping place, etc, which he does
thus:</p>

<p>"Ha+! | ha<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>a | ʞasi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'|ʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> | awahe'ɔú<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>   | tatsi' | a'pi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ʇau+!  | Ha+!    | (Niɔü'tse | masi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'ta)</p>

<p>Halloo! | day        | tomorrow  |on      | you make up in packs | shall  | they really say | Halloo! | Missouri river     | on the other side</p>

<p>tci'     | i'he¢a'e             | ta'tsi | a'<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>tau+!"</p>

<p>tent {?} | you place in a line {?} | shall  | they really say.</p>

<p>which is to say, "Halloo! tomorrow morning you shall pack your
goods (strike camp). Halloo! you shall lay them down, after reaching
(the other side of Missouri river)!"</p>

<p>Then the four leaders of the soldier gentes choose a'kiʇa (policemen)
who have a ʇuʇa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'hañʞa or captain, who then acts as crier in giving
orders, thus:</p>

<p>"Ha+!   | ni'kawasa'e! | Ha+!    | ʞahi'ʞe | waʇa'yiñʞa | ni'kawasa'e! | a'¢aki'ʇa | tatsi'</p>

<p>Halloo! | O warrior!   | Halloo, | Chief       | Saucy!         | O warrior!   | you guard   | shall</p>

<p>a<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>tau'    | ni'kawasa'e!"</p>

<p>they say really | O warrior!</p>

<p>which means, "Halloo, O warrior! Halloo, O warrior, Saucy Chief!
They have really said that you shall act as policeman or guard, O
warrior!"</p>

<p>These a'kiʇa have to punish any persons who violate the laws of the
hunt. But there is another grade of men; the four leaders of the
soldier gentes tell the captain to call certain men wa'paʞ¢a'ɔi utsi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>',
and they are expected to punish any a'kiʇa who fail to do their duty.
Supposing Mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> k'i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> waʇayiñʞa was selected, the crier would say:</p>

<p>"Ha+! ni'kawasa'e! Ha+, Mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> k'i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>' waʇa'yiñʞa n'ikawasa'e! Ha+!
u¢a'tsi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> tatsi' a'<hi rend="font-weight: bold">d</hi>i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>tau', ni'kawasa'e!"</p>

<p>"Halloo, O warrior! Halloo, O warrior, Saucy Sun Carrier! Halloo, it has been
really said that you shall strike the offenders without hesitation, O warrior!"</p>

<pb n="237" /><anchor id="Pg237" />

<p>The four headmen direct a captain to order a Hañʞa uʇa¢antsi man
to lead the scouts, and subsequently to call on a Sĭntsaʞ¢ĕ man for
that purpose, alternating between the two sides of the camping circle.
There are thus three grades of men engaged in the hunt—the ordinary
members of the soldier gentes, the akiʇa, and the wapaʞ¢aɔi utsi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>.</p>

<p>Should the Osage be warring against the Kansa or any other tribe,
and one of the foe slip into the Osage camp and beg for protection of
the Tsiɔu wactaʞe (chief), the latter is obliged to help the suppliant.
He must send for the Sĭntsaʞ¢ĕ and Tse ʇṵʞa intse (leaders), whom he
would thus address: "I have a man whom I wish to live. I desire
you to act as my soldiers." At the same time the Tsiɔu wactaʞe would
send word to the Pa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ɥka wactaʞe, who would summon a Waɔaɔe and
a Hañʞa uta¢antsi to act as his soldiers or policemen. Meantime the
kettle of the Tsiɔu wactaʞe was hung over the fire as soon as possible
and food was cooked and given to the fugitive. When he had eaten
(a mouthful) he was safe. He could then go through the camp with
impunity. This condition of affairs lasted as long as he remained with
the tribe, but it terminated when he returned to his home. After food
had been given to the fugitive by the Tsiɔu wactaʞe any prominent
man of the tribe could invite the fugitive to a feast.</p>

<p>The privilege of taking care of the children was given to the Tsiɔu
wactaʞe and the Pa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ɥka wactaʞe, according to Saucy Chief. When a
child (on the Tsiɔu side) is named, a certain old man is required to
sing songs outside of the camp, dropping some tobacco from his pipe
down on the toes of his left foot as he sings each song. On the first
day the old man of the Tsiɔu (wactaʞe?) takes four grains of corn, one
grain being black, another red, a third blue, and a fourth white,
answering to the four kinds of corn dropped by the four buffalo, as
mentioned in the tradition of the Osage. After chewing the four
grains and mixing them with his saliva, he passes them between the
lips of the child to be named. Four stones are put into a fire, one stone
toward each of the four quarters. The Tsiɔu old man orders some
cedar and a few blades of a certain kind of grass that does not die in
winter, to be put aside for his use on the second day. On the second
day, before sunrise, the Tsiɔu old man speaks of the cedar tree and its
branches, saying, "It shall be for the children." Then he mentions
the river, the deep holes in it, and its branches, which he declares shall
be medicine in future for the children. He takes the four heated stones,
places them in a pile, on which he puts the grass and cedar. Over
this he pours water, making steam, over which the child is held. Then
four names are given by the headman of the gens to the father, who
selects one of them as the name for the child. Meantime men of different
gentes bring cedar, stones, etc, and perform their respective ceremonies.
The headman (Tsiɔu wactaʞe?) takes some of the water
(into which he puts some cedar), giving four sips to the child. Then he
dips his own left hand into the water and rubs the child down the left<pb n="238" /><anchor id="Pg238" />
side, from the top of the head to the feet; next he rubs it in front,
then down the right side, and finally down the back. He invites all
the women of his gens who wish to be blessed to come forward, and
he treats them as he did the infant. At the same time the women of
the other gentes are blessed in like manner by the headmen of their
respective gentes.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE IOWA</head>

<p>The Iowa camping circle was divided into two half-circles, occupied
by two phratries of four gentes each. The first phratry regulated the
hunt and other tribal affairs during the autumn and winter; the second
phratry took the lead during the spring and summer. The author is
indebted to the late Reverend William Hamilton for a list of the Iowa
gentes, obtained in 1880 during a visit to the tribe. Since then the
author has recorded the following list of gentes and subgentes, with
the aid of a delegation of the Iowa who visited Washington:</p>

<p rend="text-align: center"><hi rend="font-style: italic">First phratry</hi></p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm}|p{3.5cm}'">
<row>
<cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Gentes</hi></cell><cell><hi rend="font-style: italic">Subgentes</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>1. Tu'-na<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-p'i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Black bear. Tohi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> and Çiʞre wonañe were chiefs of this gens in 1880.  Tohi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> kept the sacred pipe.</cell>
<cell>1. Ta'po-çka, a large black bear with a white spot on the chest.<lb />
2. Pŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'-xa çka, a black bear with a red nose; literally, Nose White.<lb />
3. Mŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-tci'-nye, Young black bear, a short black bear.<lb />
4. Ki'-ro-ko'-qo-tce, a small reddish black bear, motherless; it has little hair and runs swiftly.</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>2. Mi-tci'-ra-tce, Wolf. Ma'-hi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> was a chief of this gens.</cell>
<cell>1. Cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'-ta<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> çka, White-wolf.<lb />
2. Cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'-ta<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> çe-we, Black-wolf.<lb />
3. Cŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'-ta<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi> qo'-ʇɔe, Gray-wolf.<lb />
4. Ma-nyi'-ka-qçi', Coyote.</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>3. Tce'-xi-ta, Eagle and Thunder-being gens.</cell>
<cell>1. Na' tci-tce', i.e. Qra'-qtci, Real or Golden eagle.<lb />
2. Qra' hŭñ'-e, Ancestral or Gray eagle.<lb />
3. Qra' ʞre'-ye, Spotted-eagle.<lb />
4. Qra' pa ça<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>; Bald-eagle.</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>4. Qo'-ta-tci, Elk; now extinct. The Elk gens funished the soldiers or policemen.</cell>
<cell>1. Ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'-pe-xa qa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'-ye, Big-elk.<lb />
2. Ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'-pe-xa yiñ'-e, Young-elk (?).<lb />
3. Ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'-pe-xa ɔ́re'-ʇɔe yiñ'-e, Elk-somewhat-long.<lb />
4. Ho'-ma yiñ'-e, Young elk (?). The difference between Ŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'pexa and Homa is unknown.  The former may be the archaic name for "elk."</cell>
</row>
<pb n="239" /><anchor id="Pg239" />
<row>
<cell>5. Pa'-qça, Beaver. Probably the archaic name, as beaver is now ra-we. The survivors of this gens have joined the Pa-ça or Beaver gens of the Oto tribe.</cell>
<cell>1. Ra-we' qa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'ye, Big-Beaver.<lb />
2. Ra-ɔ́ro'-ʇɔe, meaning unknown.<lb />
3. Ra-we' yiñ'-e, Young-beaver.<lb />
4. Ni'wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-ci'-ke, Water-person.</cell>
</row>
</table>

<p rend="text-align: center"><hi rend="font-style: italic">Second phratry</hi></p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{3.5cm}|p{3.5cm}'">
<row>
<cell>6. Ru'-tce, Pigeon</cell>
<cell>1. Mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-ke' qa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'-ye, Big-raccoon.<lb />
2. Mi<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-ke'yiñ'-e, Young-raccoon<lb />
3. Ru'-tce yiñ'-e, Young-pigeon.<lb />
4. Ɔo'-ke, Prairie-chicken, grouse.</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>7. A'-ru-qwa, Buffalo</cell>
<cell>1. Tce-ʇo qa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'-ye, Big-buffalo-bull.<lb />
2. Tce-ʇo yiñ'-o, Young-buffalo-bull.<lb />
3. Tce-p'o'-cke yiñ'-e, Young-buffalo-bull-that-is-distended (?).<lb />
4. Tce-yiñ'-ye, Buffalo-calf.</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>8. Wa-ka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>', Snake. An  extinct gens.</cell>
<cell>1. Wa-ka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>' ɔ́i, Yellow-snake, i.e., Rattlesnake.<lb />
2. Wa-ka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'-qtci, Real-snake, (named after a species shorter than the rattlesnake).<lb />
3. Ce'-ke yiñ'-e, Small or young ceke, the copperhead snake (?).<lb />
4. Wa-ka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>' qo'-ʇɔe, Gray-snake (a long snake, which the Omaha call swift blue snake).</cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell>9. Mañ'-ko-ke, Owl. Extinct.</cell>
<cell>The names of the subgentes have been forgotten.</cell>
</row>
</table>

<p>An account of the mythical origin of each Iowa gens, first recorded
by the Reverend William Hamilton, has been published in the Journal
of American Folk-lore.<note place="foot"><p>Vol. IV, No. 15, pp. 333-340, 1891.</p></note></p>

<p>The visiting and marriage customs of the Iowa did not differ from
those of the cognate tribes, nor did their management of the children
differ from that of the Dakota, the Omaha, and others.</p>

<p>Murder was often punished with death, by the nearest of kin or by<pb n="240" /><anchor id="Pg240" />
some friend of the murdered person. Sometimes, however, the murderer
made presents to the avengers of blood, and was permitted to live.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE OTO</head>

<p>The author has not yet learned the exact camping order of the Oto
and Missouri tribes, though he has recorded lists of their gentes (subject
to future revision), with the aid of Ke-ʞreɔ́e, an Oto, Ckaʇɔoinye, a
Missouri, and Battiste Deroin, the interpreter for the two tribes. These
gentes are as follows: 1, Pa-ça', Beaver; 2, Tuna<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'-p'i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Black bear, or
M<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>-tci'-ra-tce, Wolf; 3, A-ru'-qwa, Buffalo; 4, Ru'-qtca, Pigeon; 5,
Ma-ka'-tce, Owl; 6, Tce'-xi-ta, Eagle, Thunderbird, etc; 7, Wa-ka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>',
Snake.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE NI-U'-T'A-TCI OR MISSOURI</head>

<p>This tribe, which for many years has been consolidated with the Oto,
has at least three gentes. It may have had more, but their names have
not yet been recorded. 1, Tu-na<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'-p'i<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Black bear; 2, Tce-xi'-ta, Eagle,
Thunderbird, etc, in four subgentes: (<hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>) Wa-kan'-ta, Thunderbird;
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>) Qra, Eagle; (<hi rend="font-style: italic">c</hi>) ʞre'-ta<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, Hawk; (<hi rend="font-style: italic">d</hi>) Mo'-mi, A-people-who eat-no-small-birds-which-have-been-killed-by-larger-ones
(a recent addition to
this gens, probably from another tribe): 3, Ho-ma' or Ho-ta'-tci, Elk.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" level1="THE HOTCANGARA OR WINNEBAGO" />
<head>THE HOTCAÑGARA OR WINNEBAGO</head>

<p>The Winnebago call themselves Ho-tcañ'-ga-ră', "First or parent
speech." While they have gentes, they have no camping circle, as
their priscan habitat was in a forest region. The following names were
obtained from James Alexander, a full-blood of the Wolf gens, and
from other members of the tribe:</p>

<p>1. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Wolf gens</hi>—Common name, Cŭñk i-ki'-ka-ra'-tca-da, or Cŭñk-tcañk'i-ki'-ka-ra'-tca-da,
Those-calling-themselves-after-the-dog-or-wolf;
archaic name, ¢e-go'-ni-na, meaning not recorded.</p>

<p>2. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Black-bear gens</hi>—Common name, Ho<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>te' i-ki'-ka-ra'-tca-da, They-call-themselves-after-the-black-bear;
archaic name, Tco'-na-ke-ră,, meaning
not recorded.</p>

<p>3. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Elk gens</hi>—Common name, Hu-wa<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'-i-ki'-ka-ra'-tca-da, They-callthemselves-after-the-elk;
archaic name not recorded.</p>

<p>4. Snake gens—Common name, Wa-kan' i-ki'-ka-ra'-tca-da, They-call-themselves-after-a-snake;
archaic name not recorded.</p>

<p>5. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Bird gens</hi>—Common name, Wa-ni¢k' i-ki'-ka-ra'-tca-da, They-call-themselves-after-a-bird;
archaic name not recorded. This gens is composed
of four subgentes, as follows: (<hi rend="font-style: italic">a</hi>) Hi-tca-qce-pa-ră, or Eagle;
(<hi rend="font-style: italic">b</hi>) Ru-tcke, or Pigeon; (c) Ke-re-tcŭ<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>, probably Hawk; (d) Wa-ka<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>'-tca-ră,
or Thunderbird. The archaic names of the subgentes were not
recorded.</p>

<p>6. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Buffalo gens</hi>—Common name, Tce' i-ki'-ka-ra'-tca-da, They-call-themselves-after-a-buffalo; archaic name not recorded.</p>

<pb n="241" /><anchor id="Pg241" />

<p>7. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Deer gens</hi>—Common name, Tca' i-ki'-ka-ra'-tca-da, They-call-themselves-after-a-deer;
archaic name not recorded.</p>

<p>8. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Water-monster gens</hi>—Common name, Wa-ktce'-qi i-ki'-ka-ra'-tca-da,
They-call-themselves-after-a-water-monster; archaic name not recorded.</p>

<p>Some of the Winnebago say that there is an Omaha gens among the
Winnebago of Wisconsin, but James Alexander knew nothing about
it. It is very probable that each Winnebago gens was composed of
four subgentes; thus, in the tradition of the Winnebago Wolf gens,
there is an account of four kinds of wolves, as in the corresponding
Iowa tradition.</p>

<p>The Winnebago lodges were always built with the entrances facing
the east. When the warriors returned from a fight they circumambulated
the lodge four times, sunwise, stopping at the east just before
entering.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE MANDAN</head>

<p>The Mandan tribe has not been visited by the author, who must content
himself with giving the list of gentes furnished by Morgan, in his
"Ancient Society." This author's system of spelling is preserved:</p>

<p>1. Wolf gens, Ho-ra-ta'-mŭ-make (Qa-ra-ta' nu-mañ'-ke?).</p>

<p>2. Bear gens, Mä-to'-no-mäke (Ma-to' nu-mañ'-ke).</p>

<p>3. Prairie-chicken gens, See-poosh'-kä (Si-pu'-cka nu-mañ'-ke).</p>

<p>4. Good-knife gens, Tä-na-tsŭ'-kä (Ta-ne-tsu'-ka nu-mañ'-ke?).</p>

<p>5. Eagle gens, Ki-tä'-ne-mäke (Qi-ta' nu-mañ'-ke?).</p>

<p>6. Flat-head gens, E-stä-pa' (Hi-sta pe' nu-mañ'-ke?).</p>

<p>7. High-village gens, Me-te-ah'-ke.</p>

<p>All that follows concerning the Mandan was recorded by Prince
Maximilian in 1833. Polygamy was everywhere practiced, the number
of wives differing, there being seldom more than four, and in general
only one. The Mandan marriage customs resemble those of the Dakota
and other cognate peoples.</p>

<p>When a child is born a person is paid to give it the name chosen by
the parents and kindred. The child is held up, then turned to all sides
of the heavens, in the direction of the course of the sun, and its name
is proclaimed. A Mandan cradle consists of a leather bag suspended
by a strap to a crossbeam in the hut.</p>

<p>There are traces of descent in the female line; for example, sisters
have great privileges; all the horses that a young man steals or captures
in war are brought by him to his sister. He can demand from his
sister any object in her possession, even the clothing which she is wearing,
and he receives it immediately. The mother-in-law never speaks to
her son-in-law, unless on his return from war he bring her the scalp and
gun of a slain foe, in which event she is at liberty from that moment
to converse with him. This custom is found, says Maximilian, among
the Hidatsa, but not among the Crow and Arikara. While the Dakota,
Omaha, and other tribes visited by the author have the custom of<pb n="242" /><anchor id="Pg242" />
"bashfulness," which forbids the mother-in-law and son-in-law to speak
to each other, no allowable relaxation of the prohibition has been
recorded.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE HIDATSA</head>

<p>Our chief authority for the names of the Hidatsa gentes is Morgan's
"Ancient Society." Dr Washington Matthews could have furnished a
corrected list from his own notes had they not unfortunately been
destroyed by fire. All that can now be done is to give Morgan's list,
using his system of spelling:</p>

<p>1. Knife, Mit-che-ro'-ka.</p>

<p>2. Water, Min-ne pä'-ta.</p>

<p>3. Lodge, Bä-ho-hä'-ta.</p>

<p>4. Prairie chicken, Scech-ka-be-ruh-pä'-ka (Tsi-tska' do-ḣpa'-ka of
Matthews; Tsi-tska' d¢o-qpa'-ka in the Bureau alphabet).</p>

<p>5. Hill people, E-tish-sho'-ka.</p>

<p>6. Unknown animal, Aḣ-naḣ-ha-nä'-me-te.</p>

<p>7. Bonnet, E-ku'-pä-be-ka.</p>

<p>The Hidatsa have been studied by Prince Maximilian (1833), Hayden,
and Matthews, the work of the last writer<note place="foot"><p>Ethnography and Philology of the Hidatsa Indians; U.S. Geological and Geographical Survey,
miscellaneous publications No. 7, Washington, 1877.</p></note> being the latest one treating
of them; and from it the following is taken:</p>

<p>Marriage among the Hidatsa is usually made formal by the distribution
of gifts on the part of the man to the woman's kindred. Afterward presents
of equal value are commonly returned by the wife's relations, if they
have the means of so doing and are satisfied with the conduct of the husband.
Some travelers have represented that the "marriage by purchase"
among the Indians is a mere sale of the woman to the highest bidder,
whose slave she becomes. Matthews regards this a misrepresentation
so far as it concerns the Hidatsa, the wedding gift being a pledge to
the parents for the proper treatment of their daughter, as well as an
evidence of the wealth of the suitor and his kindred. Matthews has
known many cases where large marriage presents were refused from
one person, and gifts of much less value accepted from another, simply
because the girl showed a preference for the poorer lover. Marriages
by elopement are considered undignified, and different terms are applied
to a marriage by elopement and one by parental consent. Polygamy
is practiced, but usually with certain restrictions. The husband of the
eldest of several sisters has a claim to each of the others as she grows
up, and in most cases the man takes such a potential wife unless she
form another attachment. A man usually marries his brother's widow,
unless she object, and he may adopt the orphans as his own children.
Divorce is easily effected, but is rare among the better class of people
in the tribe. The unions of such people often last for life; but among
persons of a different character divorces are common. Their social
discipline is not very severe. Punishments by law, administered by the<pb n="243" /><anchor id="Pg243" />
"soldier band," are only for serious offenses against the regulations of
the camp. He who simply violates social customs in the tribe often
subjects himself to no worse punishment than an occasional sneer or
taunting remark; but for grave transgressions he may lose the regard
of his friends. With the Hidatsa, as with other western tribes, it is
improper for a man to hold a direct conversation with his mother-in-law;
but this custom seems to be falling into disuse.</p>

<p>The kinship system of the Hidatsa does not differ materially from
that of any of the cognate tribes. When they wish to distinguish
between the actual father and a father's real or potential brothers, or
between the actual mother and the mother's real or potential sisters,
they use the adjective ka'ti (kaɥtɔi), real, true, after the kinship term
when the actual parent is meant.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE CROW OR ABSAROKA</head>

<p>As this tribe belongs to the Hidatsa linguistic substock, it is very
probable that the social laws and customs of the one people are identical
with those of the other, as there has been nothing to cause extensive
differentiation.</p>

<p>It is not known whether the Hidatsa and Crow tribes ever camped
in a circle. Morgan's list of the Crow gentes is given, with his peculiar
notation, as follows:</p>

<p>1. Prairie Dog gens, A-che-pä-be'-cha.</p>

<p>2. Bad Leggings, E-sach'-ka-buk.</p>

<p>3. Skunk, Ho-ka-rut'-cha.</p>

<p>4. Treacherous Lodges, Ash-bot-chee-ah.</p>

<p>5. Lost Lodges, Ah-shin'-nä de'-ah (possibly intended for Last Lodges,
those who camped in the rear).</p>

<p>6. Bad Honors, Ese-kep-kä'-buk.</p>

<p>7. Butchers. Oo-sä-bot'-see.</p>

<p>8. Moving Lodges, Ah-hä-chick.</p>

<p>9. Bear-paw Mountain, Ship-tet'-zä.</p>

<p>10. Blackfoot Lodges, Ash-kane'-na.</p>

<p>11. Fish Catchers, Boo-a-dă'-sha.</p>

<p>12. Antelope, O-hot-du-sha.</p>

<p>13. Raven, Pet-chale-ruh-pä'-ka.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE BILOXI</head>

<p>The tribal organization of this people has disappeared. When the
few survivors were visited by the author at Lecompte, Louisiana, in
1892 and 1893, they gave him the names of three of the clans of the
Biloxi, descent being reckoned in the female line. These clans are: 1,
Ita a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>yadi, Deer people; 2, O<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>ʇi a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>yadi, Bear people; 3, Naqotod¢a
a<hi rend="vertical-align: super">n</hi>yadi, Alligator people. Most of the survivors belong to the Deer
clan. The kinship system of the Biloxi is more complicated than that
of any other tribe of the stock; in fact, more than that of any of the<pb n="244" /><anchor id="Pg244" />
tribes visited by the author. The names of 53 kinship groups are still
remembered, but there are at least a dozen others whose names have
been forgotten. Where the ¢egiha language, for example, has but one
term for grandchild, and one grandchild group, the Biloxi has at least
fourteen. In the ascending series the Dakota and ¢egiha do not have
any terms beyond grandfather and grandmother. But for each sex the
Biloxi has terms for at least three degrees beyond the grandparent.
The ¢egiha has but one term for father's sister and one for mother's
brother, father's brother being "father," and mother's sister "mother."
But the Biloxi has distinct terms (and groups) for father's elder sister,
father's younger sister, father's elder brother, father's younger brother,
and so on for the mother's elder and younger brothers and sisters. The
Biloxi distinguishes between an elder sister's son and the son of a
younger sister, and so between the daughter of an elder sister and a
younger sister's daughter. A Biloxi man may not marry his wife's
brother's daughter, nor his wife's father's sister, differing in this respect
from a Dakota, an Omaha, a Ponka, etc; but he can marry his deceased
wife's sister. A Biloxi woman may marry the brother of her deceased
husband. Judging from the analogy furnished by the Kansa tribe it
was very probably the rule before the advent of the white race that a
Biloxi man could not marry a woman of his own clan.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE TUTELO</head>

<p>It is impossible to learn whether the Tutelo ever camped in a circle.
The author obtained the following clan names (descent being in the
female line) from John Key, an Indian, on Grand River reservation,
Ontario, Canada, in September, 1882: On "one side of the fire" were
the Bear and Deer clans, the Wolf and Turtle being on the other side.
John Key's mother, maternal grandmother, and Mrs Christine Buck
were members of the Deer clan. There were no taboos. The Tutelo
names of the clans have been forgotten.</p>
</div>

<div>
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>THE CATAWBA</head>

<p>Dr A. S. Gatschet, of the Bureau of Ethnology, visited the Catawba
tribe prior to March, 1882, when he obtained an extensive vocabulary
of the Catawba language, but he did not record any information respecting
the social organization of the people.</p>

<p>For further information regarding the Siouan tribes formerly inhabiting
the Atlantic coast region, see "Siouan Tribes of the East," by
James Mooney, published as a bulletin of the Bureau of Ethnology.</p>
</div>

</body>

<back rend="page-break-before: right">
<div>
<pgIf output="pdf">
  <then>
      <div>
        <divGen type="footnotes" />
      </div>
  </then>
  <else>
      <div>
        <head>Footnotes</head>
        <divGen type="footnotes" />
      </div>
  </else>
</pgIf>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<divGen type="pgfooter" />
</div>

</back>

    </text>
</TEI.2>

<!--
A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 19518-tei.txt or 19518-tei.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/5/1/19518/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.


THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder. Information on the
copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use imposed by
the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the beginning of this
work.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
-->
